Find out more about the history and various organs of the United Nations. 
As in the above activity, count the number of different animals and plants in this area and the number of individuals of each species. 
Fig. . (a): A Coniferous Forest 
Lift a small sample of the tissue onto a microscope slide on which you already have placed a drop of iodine solution. Put the cover slip on. 
By statement : We express the scale of a map by statement or by language . 
Do you know? 
A potometer provides an indirect measurement of the transpiration rate it measures how fast water is absorbed, which is related to how fast water vapour is being lost. It cannot measure how fast water vapour is being given off directly. 
v. development of social infrastructure : Development of social infrastructure is another important achievement of our five year plans . 
From where could this indigo be procured? 
Improve your learning 
And also tried bring in harmony among Hindus and Muslims . 
emulsion 
Did you know? 
A and C were covered with black paper on their covers. 
With the help of ozone : Ozone gas is formed due to thunderclap in the sky . 
All these keep their own properties intact in the air . 
Though amoeba is a one-cell animal , it takes in solid food through its body surface . 
During 1995 - 96 , Bangladesh had 884 kilometres of broad gauge railway lines , but recently , it increased to 659 . 33 kilometres . 
Articles/ Activities (A) 
Natural Vegetation 
They built tanks , temples , wells , forts and palaces . 
non-metals are found on the far right hand side of the table; and 
Preservation of food 
. Non-contact Forces 
Pseudopodia Epithelial Tissue : Found in pseudopodial cells in the endoderms of Hydra and in the intestine of vertebrate animals . 
In the next activity we will balance an equation that is much simpler, but we are not going to include all the explanations of the previous activity. 
Barytes: This is a group of ores from which an element called Barium is extracted. Barium is used for industrial and medical purposes. Barytes is also used in drilling deep holes for petroleum and natural gas. 
District Mineral 
The match starts with a '' throw off '' . 
Thrombocyte or Platelets : These are present in the blood of vertebrate animals . 
The British and French Companies were in the forefront of this . 
Aniseed , fenugreek seed , pepper , parsley , white cumin , all these types of flavored spices can be persevered in the same process . 
Growth rate of population : The growth rate of population indicates the rate at which the population is growing. In estimating the growth rate the increase in population is compared with the base population. It can be measured annually or over a decade. 
Answer the following questions briefly. 
Why farmers go for machinary for harvesting crops? 
The places situated in the high pressure areas on both the hemispheres have dry climate throughout the year . 
An example will help you understand the fact . 
Heat is a form of energy . 
They are made of steel or plastic . 
... behind the First Five Year Plan lies the conception of India s unity and of a mighty co-operative effort of all the peoples of India We have to remember always that it is not merely the governmental machinery that counts in all this, but even more so the enthusiasm and co-operation of the people. Our people must have the sensation of partnership in a mighty enterprise, of being fellow-travellers towards the next goal that they and we have set before us. The Plan may be, and has to be, based on the calculations of economists, statisticians and the like, but figures and statistics, very important as they are, do not give life to the scheme. That breath of life comes in other ways, and it is for us now to make this Plan, which is enshrined in cold print, something living, vital and dynamic, which captures the imagination of the people. 
A concave mirror forms magnified inverted image when the object is d. multiple refraction placed at a. ' F ' d. beyond ' C ' . 
Specialised cells that perform a specific function, group together to form a tissue. For example, muscle cells will group together to form muscle tissue, epithelial cells will group together to form the skin, and nerve cells will group together to form the brain and nerves. 
Issue of token coins : Another reform of Mohammad was that , he issued copper coins in place of silver coins with the same face value . 
A compression is a region in a longitudinal wave where the particles are closest together. 
Write your observations . 
What are the contributions of the coastal districts of Karnataka in the economic development of India ? 
piece of string about cm long 
They are of different types . 
This does not mean that hydrogen and oxygen always combine in a ratio to form . Multiple proportions are possible. For example, hydrogen and oxygen may combine in different proportions to form rather than . In , the ratio is and the mass ratio of hydrogen to oxygen is . This will be the same for any molecule of hydrogen peroxide. 
Similarly per cent of casual workers in urban areas are below poverty line . 
Foreign invasions During this period , there sprang up city-states in Greece . 
Mathematical skills in Life Sciences Scales 
These rights are absolutely necessary for proper and smooth living . 
. Which is not a safe place during a thunder storm? 
Pebbles. 
. ______________ buffaloes giver more milk. 
The story of the scale 
. Why does the compass always show the North ? Know the reasons with the help of your teacher. 
Microorganisms . 
. How important was the income from land revenue to the stability of the Mughal Empire? 
_____ carry the _____ blood to the heart from where it is sent to the _____ to be oxygenated. 
Stigma : The swollen part at top of the style is the stigma . 
. The law has the right to forbid only actions that are injurious to society. 
Various steps are taken for population control so that birth rate is reduced and family size is kept small . 
B. People belonging to different religions can live together happily as equal citizens. 
They live in the deserts of Africa . 
Silk comes from silkworms and wool is obtained from sheep, goat and yak. Hence silk and wool are animal fibres. 
Left with no other option , the Portuguese left the country in . 
They brought the Akkadian state under their control and established a large state . 
Here the fleshy sepals of the flowers of an inflorescence unite together to form a fruit . 
Livestock includes mainly horses , pigs , sheep and cows . 
Also notice that in beaker b red copper is found at the bottom of the beaker and on the nail leaving light green iron sulphate solution. 
What is the criteria to decide a best fuel? 
As in the wide expanse of the divine compassion there is room for all classes and the followers of all creeds, so in his Imperial dominions, which on all sides were limited only by the sea, there was room for the professors of opposite religions, and for beliefs, good and bad, and the road to intolerance was closed. Sunnis and Shias met in one mosque and Christians and Jews in one church to pray. He consistently followed the principle of universal peace (sulh-i kul). 
The term rachitic denotes the condition of a person affected with vitamin D deficiency disease called rickets . 
f Grind the soaked paper and make it into dough . 
Let us study about some marching movements in this class . 
Read more about the 'Goldilocks Zone'bit.ly/ITCQU 
This is done by reducing the stake of the government either fully or partially and thereby increasing the stake of the private sector in the Public Sector Units ( PSUs ) . 
The Government is trying to provide education , food , house and health facilities to these people in the recent years . 
After the death of Krishnappa Nayaka , the ruler of Surapura , Venkatappa Nayaka , a boy of eight years , became his successor . 
LESSON WASTE IS WEALTH 
Atomic Structure negative terminal of the battery is called the cathode ( negative electrode ) . 
Both father and mother work . 
III Discuss . 
Lactobacillus 
Through secret negotiation , Dupleix created a confederation of chandasahib and Muzaffar Jung . 
How did you draw the fuse that we made using steel wool in the last activity? The conventional symbol for drawing a fuse in a circuit diagram is shown here: 
The day-to-day condition of the atmosphere at a place with respect to the temperature, humidity, rainfall, wind-speed, etc., is called the weather at that place. 
b ) Observe , record , and compare the effect of gravity on several objects in motion ( e.g. , a thrown ball and a dropped ball falling to Earth ) . 
enabled s ee animals to help them perform these movements . 
Used food or stale food should be avoided . 
Put four to five colours into water and dip a piece of white cloth or a piece of paper in it and immediately remove it . 
Can you remember learning about mixtures in Gr. ? You may remember that a mixture consists of two or more substances mixed together. The next section is NOT about mixtures. It is about substances that are not mixed with anything and consists of only one type of matter throughout. Such substances are called pure substances. In this sense, 'pure' simply means: not mixed with any other substances. 
They extends from Bering Strait to the Caspian Sea . 
It is difficult to imagine forests in our country without the people who live in them and use them. Forests provide the critical resource for the very poor in our state to make a living. In North Coastal Region, for example, % of the people who use the forests collect head loads of Fuel wood and carry them to markets for sale. On the other hand in Rayalaseema districts most people depend upon the forests for grazing sheep and goats. In Coastal region about % people depend upon such collection of forest produce. You would have made a long list of forest produce people collect, but the full list is much, much longer with about more than sixty items on it! 
III . 
Generally stomata occur in the lower epidermis . 
Egg : The ovum is often called an egg . 
But why should a bank want us to have a higher income? 
Sala killing a tiger is the royal emblem of Hoysalas . 
. Describe current government strategy of poverty alleviation? 
Awards : To promote kabaddi and encourage players , the government announced Arjuna award in , for those representing state , national and international level . 
QUESTIONS: 
LESSON RELIGIOUS AND SOCIAL REFORM MOVEMENTS Introduction Between the th and th centuries many religious and social reform movements were witnessed in India . 
Flora of Sundribuns is another notable book written by him . 
sugar water ( tablespoon dissolved in a cup of water) 
Posters bearing the picture and ideas of Hitler were circulated . 
ANNEXURE 
Preamble to the Constitution The Constitution of India begins with a Preamble . 
Nitrogen , found in many fertilizers , is good for farming . 
The farmers stand on a raised platform and allow the threshed food grains to fall slowly on ground . 
Vegetables and fruits are perfectly cut into slice within a short time with these machines . 
Atomic number 
Oh ! 
What would she do if she went to her bank branch? 
Construct circuits to measure the emf and the terminal potential difference for a battery. Some common elements (components) which can be found in electrical circuits include light bulbs, batteries, connecting leads, switches, resistors, voltmeters and ammeters. You have learnt about many of these already. Below is a table with the items and their symbols: 
Rack : - Rack for drying clothes are made of wood , iron and plastic . 
Female aedis mosquitoes are vectors of dengue . 
The fundamental discovery of Volta is that an electric current is generated by separating two dissimilar conductors with acids . 
Use of dynamos in both rural and urban areas of Bangladesh is increasing steadily . 
This heat is caused by friction - the force that holds back the movement of a sliding object . 
Remember bud Potato Ginger Sweet potato eshy roots bud Bryophyllum leaf All organisms reproduce and give rise to young ones of their own kind . 
The wholewheat roll and lettuce, tomato and apple contain cellulose, which acts as roughage. 
In these patients the excess glucose is eliminated through urine . 
Most of the people believe that the result of polio cases is always paralysis of the body . 
Hence, many areas of forests have been protected against human interference. 
This division set in motion a series of events that turned Vietnam into a battlefield bringing death and destruction to its people as well as the environment. The Bao Dai regime was soon overthrown by a coup led by Ngo Dinh Diem. Diem built a repressive and authoritarian government. Anyone who opposed him was called a communist and was jailed and killed. Diem retained Ordinance , a French law that permitted Christianity but outlawed Buddhism. His dictatorial rule came to be opposed by a broad opposition united under the banner of the National Liberation Front (NLF). 
In every country after a certain interval of time , say after 10 years in general , a survey is conducted to know the different aspects of population . 
Chapter Three: Our Constitution makers believed that fundamental rights were quite central to the Constitution because 
THE SIX FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS ARE -- Right to Equality Right to Freedom Right against Exploitation Right to freedom of Religion Cultural and Educational Right Right to Constitutional Remedies -- -- -- -- -- I I `` What do you mean by Right to Equality ? '' 
Digestive gland : The glands that produce juice , which help in the digestion of food are called digestive glands . 
It instils national pride among all individuals . 
Iron , and iron stand are necessary for ironing . 
Chapter : Chemical bonding . Introduction What happens when atoms bond? 
d ) Investigate and record temperature data to show the effects of heat energy on changing the states of water . 
UNIT - POLLUTION 
The most commonly used indicator is litmus . 
The industrial revolution as you know started in England around and soon factory production spread to France, Holland, Germany, Spain, Russia, etc. Countries like England and Germany, which had large reserves of coal and other minerals, took lead in developing new industries. 
Buy shoes worth Rs and get one pair of shoes worth Rs free. 
The most notable among the species is the golda prawns . 
Using just one light bulb with two or more batteries will result in a brighter light . 
We come into contact with many physical quantities in the natural world on a daily basis. For example, things like time, mass, weight, force, and electric charge, are physical quantities with which we are all familiar. We know that time passes and physical objects have mass. Things have weight due to gravity. We exert forces when we open doors, walk along the street and kick balls. We experience electric charge directly through static shocks in winter and through using anything which runs on electricity. 
The structure of diamond is a ) hexagonal c ) soccer ball b ) tetrahedral d ) amorphous . 
Which objects do not form shadows? 
The speed of revolution is kmh- . 
The history of classification began with Aristotle. 
This creates a larger crack , allowing more water to gather creating an even larger crack . 
If the stain is old it should be removed with diluted ammonia solution and washed it with soap and water . 
Variation is the difference between individuals from the same species. 
His mother said that woollen clothes trap air and act as bad conductor of heat or cold . 
But a kind of symbiotic thallophyta is formed by the association of algae and fungi which is known as lichen . 
After combustion , drop a blue litmus paper soaked in water into the jar . 
IV EXERCISE : AGEY PAV Position : Place both the legs in hoshiyar position and join the lezium at the right side . 
One of them led to the palace , the second led to the ornate temple and the third led to the pyramids . 
Fig . Transporting Animals 
(c) was an important centre of the Bhakti tradition in Maharashtra. 
Simultaneously with the formation of pseudopodia , the protoplasm of the body of Amoeba flows in that direction and with that other parts of the body move that way . 
The social changes in Maasai society occurred at two levels. First, the traditional difference based on age, between the elders and warriors, was disturbed, though it did not break down entirely. Second, a new distinction between the wealthy and poor pastoralists developed. 
It is washed away in water . 
Food is also needed to give support for this process . 
Flood plains of the Dhaleswari and the Jamuna can be mentioned as examples . 
Fig. 
Chapter - HIGH JUMP Following skills are learnt in this athletics . 
What ' s the reason ? 
Application of learnt ideas , problem solving skills and critical thinking is to be encouraged . 
(iii) Write a poem or paragraph showing the importance of wild life. 
Our Banlgadesh was East Bengal befor and later it became East Pakistan . 
How - ever , the true meaning is the ' union of the atma and the paramatma ' . 
d = m/ = m. 
Ozone layer danger.bit.ly/dEzkgQ 
Addition of salt : When salt is added to food , it removes the water from Fig . Refrigerator food by osmosis . 
A straight line that meets the circle at one and only one point is called a tangent to the circle. Straight line ABC is a tangent to the circle at point B. 
The coacervates continued to constantly take in new materials from the ocean and release the degraded materials . 
elastic band 
Apart from the gramabhojaka, there were other independent farmers, known as grihapatis, most of whom were smaller landowners. And then there were men and women such as the dasa karmakara, who did not own land, and had to earn a living working on the fields owned by others. 
The qualifications and functions of the Legislators , and the qualifications and powers of the Governor have been described . 
This year you will learn about the characteristics of a kho-kho player , the achievements of kho-kho players at the state and national levels , and the awards won by them . 
What skeletal studies tell us 
Write a short paragraph to explain what a semi-metal is. Also give an example of one semi-metal and say where in the Periodic Table the semi-metals can be found. [ marks] 
There are training centres for the defence forces to learn their fighting skills . 
What would happen to the rest ? 
Figure .: Grasslands are regions where the vegetation is dominated by grasses. 
Differences between metals and non-metals : Recall the activities discussed so far and try to ll the following table . 
invertebrate 
glass 
frequency in 
It was found that the Law of Octaves was applicable only upto calcium, as after calcium every eighth element did not possess properties similar to that of the first. 
The path and the organs in which the air passes through are shown in the picture . 
The National Water Transport Authority has declared major inland waterways as National Waterways . 
Disease caused by fungus can be prevented by two ways . 
How is it collected and segregated ? 
A peaceful living atmosphere had been a major concern even at the time of the formation of the UN , since democracy had not become a reality even after the nd world war . 
You are familiar with the heavenly bodies like the sun , the moon , planets and stars . 
The magnets we see and use in our daily life possess different shapes. Some of the usual shapes of magnets are shown in Fig. . 
Activity . 
Emergence of nation-states in Europe 
be most suitable for the development of healthy bones and teeth? 
Office Memorandum: A communication issued by an appropriate authority stating the policy or decision of the government. 
Wind and water wash the sand and small stones away and deposit them as sediments into lakes and the ocean. This process is called deposition. 
All people including the President , the Prime Minister , Parliamentarians , Judges and officers are bound by it . 
The decision was not directly taken in the Parliament. But Parliamentary discussions on the Report influenced and shaped the decision of the government. They brought pressure on the government to act on the Mandal recommendation. If the Parliament was not in favour of this decision, the Government could not have gone ahead with it. Can you guess why? Recall what you read about the Parliament in the earlier class and try to imagine 
In symbiosis, organisms share their food and shelter. 
These are called portal veins . 
TABLE- 
Your column should look something like this. 
Discovery of Oxygen 
The main difference of artery and vein are given below on the table . 
c) After , the readership of novels began to include poorer people. 
Its Diameter is 48 , 400 kilometres . 
Some time after puffing off its outer layers at stage D, the fuel of the central star will have become depleted. What causes the star to collapse inwards to become E? [ mark] 
Recently very limited quantity of mineral oil reserve has been detected in Bangladesh . 
Now remove the thread tied on the neck of balloon. Let the air escape from the mouth of the balloon. 
A common balance measures the mass of a body , by comparing it with a body of known mass . 
Due to their physical transformation they are found to have attraction towards the opposite sexes belonging to their age group . 
Mouth cavity contains teeth , tongue and salivary glands . 
The white portions of the discs in figure represents the sun and the black portions represents the moon. Each of these discs depict the position of the sun and moon at various stages of the eclipse. 
Pregnancy and STDs can be prevented mostly by wearing a male condom. 
The Hindustani singer and actress Ameerabai Karnataki is from Belagi town . 
Years ago , when DDT ( a poison that kills insects ) was used in the environment , a few mosquitoes were resistant to DDT . 
When the conversation over the telephone is over , the receiver should be kept properly , otherwise it will not get connected . 
Sarojini Naidu (-) 
He started Chalukya Vikramashake in memory of his power . 
Hold the same posture for some time and breathe normally . 
Micro Economics is the study of . 
. Medical care to pollution victims. 
In the case of Malabar , they say , good forest land is available for four or five Rupees an acre . 
The slice of vegetables are needed for chap sue and Chawmin . 
Small stone/rock 
Can you think of any other reasons? 
Collect the pictures of the plants and animals that live there . 
What are the changes that affected monarchy in England between Petition of Right and Bill of Rights ? 
Among the various types of solvents , water is the most easily available and the cheapest one . 
Take a small piece of Magnesium ribbon. Burn it on a flame of candle. You will find brilliant white dazzling light leaving a powdery substance behind. 
Chemical Reactions and Equations 
Exercises 
In this situation we are compelled to depend upon foreign aid . 
Diseases of plants : Fungi cause various diseases of important crop plants like Paddy , Potato , Wheat , Sugar cane etc . 
So , actually at present the number of under developed countries is few . 
Till recent past , about 1 , 500 persons have been treated at these centres . 
All solids do not expand equally even though heat is applied to them to the same extent . 
. Identify the sentences in this chapter that argue about the role of the government in providing public health. AS 
All ies died . 
In , some new laws were made in Russia giving more powers to its president. During the same time the US president visited Russia. What, according to this cartoon, is the relationship between democracy and concentration of power? Can you think of some other examples to illustrate the point being made here? 
Name Kanakadasa 's parents . 
In the world culture differs from one region to another . 
INSTRUCTIONS: 
.. (ii) IRRIGATION 
Structural and functional unit of organism is the cell . 
But it must fulfil one ' s need . 
They are dependent on other substances or organisms for transmission . 
of No . 
A thick glass tumbler often cracks when boiling water is poured into it . 
Agricultural Erosion Agriculture is the largest contributor to soil pollution caused by humans . 
We will also form Cubs and Groups of Yellow Birds in our school . 
Keep the plants in sunlight for about two hours. 
Neutral | Neutralisation | Salt 
While British imperial officials brought the game to the colonies, they made little effort to spread the game, especially in colonial territories where the subjects of empire were mainly non-white, such as India and the West Indies. Here, playing cricket became a sign of superior social and racial status, and the Afro-Caribbean population was discouraged from participating in organised club cricket, which remained dominated by white plantation owners and their servants. 
Activity . 
Explain your answer above. [ mark] 
It 's a hot place with scanty rainfall . 
Fig-(a) Picture of Trypanosoma, the protozoan organism responsible for sleeping sickness. The organism is lying next to a saucer-shaped red blood cell to give an idea of the scale. 
At the international level, the Club of Rome advocated resource conservation for the first time in a more systematic way in . Subsequently, in , Gandhian philosophy was once again presented by Schumacher in his book Small is Beautiful. The seminal contribution with respect to resource conservation at the global level was made by the Brundtland Commission Report, . This report introduced the concept of Sustainable Development and advocated it as a means for resource conservation, which was subsequently published in a book entitled Our Common Future. Another significant contribution was made at the Earth Summit at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in . 
(d) motor. 
Look carefully at the picture. How would you describe the appearance of element X? 
Furrow Irrigation 
Match the following as the model given . 
Hammurabi was the first ruler to enforce the Code of Laws . 
This will act as a screen . 
degenerative 
Why was no Trade Union allowed to form in KRS Medicines Factory? 
It is no longer thought so . 
Attribute Significance 
. As a part of Non Co-operation movement, what incidents took place in our 
Its cells may be arranged in a line . 
Amul in Gujrat and Patna Dairy in Bihar ( which is known as ` Sudha ' ) are successful examples of cooperative societies in connection with milk and milk products . 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) is one of the biggest moneylenders for any country in the world. Its member states (as on September ) do not have equal voting rights. The vote of each country is weighed by how much money it has contributed to the IMF. More than % of the voting power in the IMF is in the hands of only ten countries (US, Japan, Germany, France, UK, China, Italy, Saudi Arabia, Canada and Russia). The remaining countries have very little say in how these international organisations take decisions. The World Bank has a similar system of voting. The President of the World Bank has always been a citizen of the US, conventionally nominated by the Treasury Secretary (Finance Minister) of the US government. 
If we use money, there will be no problem in exchanging commodities. 
A lion snake sh monkey honey bee star sh crane rat cockroach weaver bird B ant hill cave tree pond hole river nest sea hive crevices Activity : Write the names of the animals that you nd in the picture , in the space provided . 
its rate of traveling distance increases by 0 . 6 metre for rise of each degree of celcius temperature . 
Lack of technical know - how : For modern industries , industrial workers with improved technical knowledge are very necessary . 
They perform the same function that is transferring message. 
But this creates a major difficulty. If each new generation is to be the combination of the DNA copies from two pre-existing individuals, then each new generation will end up having twice the amount of DNA that the previous generation had. This is likely to mess up the control of the cellular apparatus by the DNA. Besides, if each generation doubles its DNA, fairly soon there will be only DNA on earth, with no room for anything else. How many ways can we think of for solving this difficulty? 
Consider the following: 
II EXERCISE : THAL SE KADAM Position : Lift right leg in hoshiyar position . 
The salts dissolved in water are responsible for the difference in taste . 
Atmosphere 
Some pollutants that enter the air by natural disasters. For example, volcano eruptions, forest fires, dust and sand storms. 
.. Magnetic Field due to a Current through a Straight Conductor 
Look at the sky for some time. Can you see some stars forming groups with shapes like those in Fig. .. 
The health of an individual is dependent on his/her physical surroundings and his/her economic status. 
Activity : Let us conduct an experiment to know that the particles are loosely distributed in a liquid . 
Each country uses an imaginary line that is considered appropriate for its existing level of development and its accepted minimum social norms . 
'' Try again and again until you succeed '' . 
Chapter 
It is also used in the paper , leather , textile and automobile industries . 
suggest appropriate methods of separating mixtures . 
What is the input energy in this mechanical system? 
Many people of the country are engaged in the production of different goods and earn their livelihood . 
In ancient days people used to write on plant leaves and on stones . 
After studying this lesson you , understand the importance of a family . 
.. fabric protect us from cold. 
. Swapna sells the cotton to the trader. 
In this way , the heart together with its vessels carries on the circulation of blood . 
To encourage and implement the primary , secondary , adult and informal education programmes . 
He was very weak . 
pneumonia 
Used below concrete . 
On , cooling , an unsaturated solution slowly turns into a saturated solution . 
Circular motion Take a stone , tie a thread to it and whirl it with your hand and observe the motion of the stone . 
c Right to protect one s culture 
What are artificial magnets ? 
Discuss in groups or collect information about junk food. In what way are they harmful to us? 
A moving ball slows down because of the friction between the surfaces of the ball and the ground . 
They are foregut , midgut , hindgut . 
importance of Sociology Though Sociology is the youngest science among all the social sciences , its uses are universal . 
Rishabha was the first Tirthankara whereas Parswanatha was the Tirthankara . 
What is the reason behind the formation of a male or female child ? 
Record the number of learners in your class who have each characteristic. 
Due to the presence of greater amount of salt in the cells the plants can absorb saline water . 
But we should drink pure and arsenic free water . 
( positively , negatively ) III . 
Delta -- A fan shaped , low lying area of deposits at a river mouth . 
This vein carries oxygenated blood to the heart . 
Light seems to travel along straight-line paths in a transparent medium. What happens when light enters from one transparent medium to another? Does it still move along a straight-line path or change its direction? We shall recall some of our day-to-day experiences. 
The body requires energy for the maintenance of body temperature and for carrying out its normal functions . 
As a result they can not remain in the atmosphere . 
Seals and sealings 
Fossils in sedimentary rock.http://www.flickr.com/photos/ivanwalsh// 
Surgical replacement of the lens is the remedial measure . 
increased 
What causes the formation of an image ? 
The Earth is like a ball 
On the other hand soap can not produce foam in hard water . 
Rampukar lives in a one room ranted house in a crowded basti in the outskirts of the city . 
METHOD: 
Let two objects A and B of masses M and m lie at a distance d from each other as shown in Fig. .. Let the force of attraction between two objects be F. According to the universal law of gravitation, the force between two objects is directly proportional to the product of their masses. That is, 
R . P . Kent says that money is such a thing which is commonly used as a medium of exchange or a measure of value . 
Arising from the embryonic cell layer when certain types of cells when remain in a particular place of the animals body and collectively perform a common function . 
A major road to Nepal passing through Vyshali and Chamaparanya from Pataliputhra was also there . 
astronomical unit (AU): the average distance between the Earth and the Sun, equal to around million kilometres 
Move the pencil away from the mirror slowly. Does the image become smaller or larger? 
What is the final charge on each sphere? 
Let us do-: Observe reaction of Vinegar with Baking soda 
It maintains civil order and peace by protecting the life and property of citizens . 
Curved lines reduce the length of the person who wears such type of clothes but it brings rhythm and creates elegance in clothing . 
Exercises 
However instead of crests and troughs, longitudinal waves have compressions and rarefactions. 
Now remove your hand from the card . 
Water which is not salty is called fresh water . 
Use your table to draw two line graphs on the same set of axes. One graph should be the number of cells against the current (ammeter reading) and the other graph should be the number of cells against the potential difference (voltmeter reading). Decide which are your independent and dependent variables in this investigation. Draw a line of best fit through the data points. 
What is the reason for the scent / odour in bathing soap and perfume ? 
increase in velocity c ) nonuniform acceleration . 
It means LET US FILL THE TABULAR COLUMN ! 
The air which surrounds us contains oxygen , nitrogen , carbon dioxide and so on , all of which are gaseous substances . 
As we have already mentioned, a number of changes can occur when elements are combined with one another. These changes may either be physical or chemical. In this chapter we will look at chemical changes. One way of representing chemical changes is through balanced chemical equations. A chemical equation describes a chemical reaction by using symbols for the elements involved. For example, if we look at the reaction between iron and sulfur to form iron sulfide , we could represent these changes in a sentence, in a word equation or using chemical symbols: 
It did not happen in a single day . 
Atomic number and atomic mass number 
Let s recall 
A:Fat/ lipids 
You may have listened to many ballads and stories about the bravery and martial skill of Brahma Naidu and Balachandrudu. You may have also participated in Jataras dedicated to Sammakka and Sarakka - they fought against armies of kings to protect the rights of the tribal people. You might have enjoyed the popular story of Katama Raju who fought with the Kings of Nellore in defence of theright of animal herders. 
It protects the environment form green house effect . 
g. . g. . g. . COUNT : Stand up erect , keep the trunk twisted to the right and perform as was done in count no. of Char avaz but on the right side . 
The total resistance of the resistors in series is 
Philosophers began to observe the universe in a new manner and tried to explain natural phenomena with new methods . 
a. Country ______________________________________________________ 
Fig. . This activity reveals that , If A and B are bodies and L is a light source then , Shadow of A falls on B when A lies in line between light source L and B. For A to view the shadow falling on B , A should be facing B. Shadow of B falls on A when B lies in line between light source L and A. For A to view the shadow of B falling on A , A should be facing L . 
Although hydrogen appears in group , it is not an alkali metal. 
In some animals the formation of gametes does not take place. Still they produce offsprings like themselves. As the formation of gametes does not take place there is no question of fusion of gametes. Such process of reproduction is called Asexual Reproduction. 
Which seeds can float on water? 
The Panchasheel principles were developed as the basis of the bilateral relations between India and China . 
Try to know some of them . 
Yes , oxygen is slightly soluble in water . 
It is very much harmful to the body . 
Find out from your parents and elders the stories of the Palnati Virulu, Sammakka-Sarakka and Katama Raju. Relate these stories in the class. 
Picnic is a recreational arrangement for going to a nice place , eating together and making fun to get rid of monotonous life . 
The discovery of the antibiotic, penicillin was announced in . In Dr. Alexander Flemming was awarded the Nobel prize along with other scientists (Dr. Howard flory, and Dr. Ernst.B.chain). 
The burning of materials requires oxygen 
'' In life , do n't get trapped but succeed by reaching your goal through following rules and by staying within the stipulated boundaries . '' 
dear child ... . 
In the technical unemployment it is found that on one de there is unemployment among technically skilled persons and on the other side there is lack of necessary technical skills for economic development . 
Read the following statements and mime them . 
Hampi Thorangallu factory Numerous monuments are there in Hampi . 
It could be in milk, provisions, paddy, etc. Find out 
Basically a co - operative is an organization where the poor and the neglected voluntarily join hands with equal rights to improve their condition . 
Technology is the use of science . 
It causes segments of the railway tracks to expand . 
Pompeii (full documentary).bit.ly/HbQULb 
They went to a flower shop and bought cubits of garland . 
Fig-: Irregularities of two surfaces in contact 
Base 
Look at the map of Nimpur village area given here (Fig .). 
Tie a small stone at one end. Hold the other end of the thread and whirl it round, as shown in Fig. .. 
get information on what the goverment is doing? 
Explaining the rock cycle 
Protein plays a major role in producing antibodies . 
. Take hair, wool, silk, paper, cotton thread, piece of plastic, thread of sweater, piece of rope and carefully conduct a flame test. Based on smell and type of melting classify them as natural or artificial fibres. (AS) 
If population increases , the chances of water pollution increases . 
S.No Rights Fibrotex KRS Medicine Factory Brick Kilns 
Fragmentation of body : Here a plant body is divided into fragments , each of which later develops into an independent plant , such as Spirogyra , Riccia etc . 
The leaders of Renaissance made people conscious of the importance of a strong movement against the all powerful untouchability , ensuring the unity of people . 
Whenever an activity involves heating, be very careful. It is advised that such activities are performed in the presence of an elderly person from your family. Or, carry out these activities in the presence of your teacher. 
Green plants exhibit vegetative and sexual reproduction . 
The purpose of classi cation is for convenience - easy to study , identify and remember . 
Nose , nasopharynx , larynx , trachea , bronchus and lungs together form the respiratory system . 
The various harmful activities of bacteria , fungi and virus are given in the table . 
Electrovalent bond or Ionic bond : Look at the following compound formations by electrovalent or ionic bonds . 
A sudden flow of electrons between oppositely charged objects is called static ___________ . 
The crumpled foil sinks and the tray shaped foil oats . 
Cultivating the land using water from any of these sources is called irrigated agriculture . 
The office of the Principal Secretary is divided into many divisions . 
. Atomic mass and diameter 
We can use the wordinheritance in different ways. When someone dies they may leave an inheritance of money, a home, car or other physical belongings to their children or other people. In Science, inheritance is how parents pass on traits or characteristics to their children. 
chemical reaction: a process in which atoms in substances, called reactants, are rearranged to form new substances, called products 
The growing of different crops on a piece of land in pre-planned succession is called crop rotation. 
Rise of British Political Supremacy in India Impact of the British Rule Social and Riligious Reforms Freedom Struggle xii LESSON Introduction VIJAYANAGARA EMPIRE The expedition which started during th century , by Delhi Sultan Allauddin Khilji over South India , continued in th century also . 
long the Congress had ignored the dalits, for fear of offending the sanatanis, the conservative high-caste Hindus. But Mahatma Gandhi declared that swaraj would not come for a hundred years if untouchability was not eliminated. He called the untouchables harijan, or the children of God, organised satyagraha to secure them entry into temples, and access to public wells, tanks, roads and schools. He himself cleaned toilets to dignify the work of the bhangi (the sweepers), and persuaded upper castes to change their heart and give up the sin of untouchability . But many dalit leaders were keen on a different political solution to the problems of the community. They began organising themselves, demanding reserved seats in educational institutions, and a separate electorate that would choose dalit members for legislative councils. Political empowerment, they believed, would resolve the problems of their social disabilities. 
Since the fresh groundnut sells at a low price, I usually dry it and sell after a few months. Traders generally pay a higher price for dried groundnut, Vijayakumar said. 
It inspired the people to exclaim ' Hoysala ! ' 
What you have learnt 
By performing particular duty , a member brings prosperity to the family . 
Excessive use of any asset ended once upon a time . 
One such full rotation of the earth is known as solar day . 
Table . summarises the characteristics of the particles that are in each phase of matter. 
(b) Name the major continents of the earth. 
Questions 
Add two drops of milk to water . 
Is this air visible ? 
Method 
Get the same fertiliser (type and amount) 
Krishnadevaraya (-AD) 
Garo hills Cities about years ago 
** Birth rates is the number of babies born there for every , people during a particular period of time. 
It is also the functional unit in biosphere . 
It is this atmosphere of the earth that is the basis for the survival of life on the earth . 
High tide 
The highest point of Africa is Mt. Kilimanjaro and lowest point is Lake Assal , Djibouti . 
There are beautiful waterfalls in the course of these rivers . 
. Why were the amaranayakas very powerful? AS 
The solid particles will only move from their positions when they have gained enough kinetic energy for a change of state to occur and the solid melts to become a liquid. 
This type of containers can be made of glass , tin or plastic . 
Looking at the clear and cloudless night sky in winter , one would see a long line of translucent and radiant lustre of light with a wide vicinity extended north to south . 
Total [ marks] 
Make a list of habitats and food of animals and birds found in your locality . 
They do not keep high margin of profit . 
The planets outside the orbit of Mars, namely Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune are much farther off than the inner planets. They are called the outer planets. They have a ring system around them. The outer planets have large number of moons. 
The way in which historians focus on industrialisation rather than on small workshops is a good example of how what we believe today about the past is influenced by what historians choose to notice and what they ignore. Note down one event or aspect of your own life which adults such as your parents or teachers may think is unimportant, but which you believe to be important. 
Does the image appear upside down ? 
MAP .: DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENTS IN 
They were of the opinion that the wealthy people had the right to spend the money in ways they chose fit . 
This programme has also helped reduce caste prejudices because both lower and upper caste children in the school eat this meal together. In Andhra Pradesh in almost all the rural schools, mid-day meal is prepared by the members of women self help groups, who are invariably from deprived classes, and in quite a few places, dalit women have been employed to cook the meal. 
A jersey cow. 
Why do you think the tank has been dry for so long? 
Rubber: It is an equatorial crop, but under special conditions, it is also grown in tropical and sub-tropical areas. It requires moist and humid climate with rainfall of more than cm. and temperature above C. Rubber is an important industrial raw material. It is mainly grown in Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Andaman and Nicabar islands and Garo hills of Meghalaya. India ranks fifth among the world s natural rubber producers. 
We see that the vs. graph is a horizontal line. If the velocity vs. time graph is a horizontal line, it means that the velocity is constant (not changing). Motion at a constant velocity is known as uniform motion. We can use the vs. graph to calculate the velocity by finding the gradient of the line. 
So , the solution in the first beaker is acid . 
Have you considered that air and sunlight are also nonliving parts of every environment ? 
Control of Environmental Degradation 
How was this to be done? In this chapter we will see how the Company came to colonise the countryside, organise revenue resources, redefine the rights of people, and produce the crops it wanted. 
To train or develop leadership qualities among people at the grassroot level . 
Collect pictures of Baobab trees found in Karnataka . 
Therefore , it is evident that some plants grow in land and some in water . 
Battery : Two or more cells joined together to get more electric current is called battery . 
Later the lower part of the scion is cut in the same shape , and carefully fixed into the cut end of the root - stock and then tightly tied the two together with cotton thread after applying wax and fungicides . 
Write or sentences about your observations. 
Clean water containing no microbes is called safe water . 
Silk 
Materials required to produce a commodity are called raw materials. Factories require large, continuous supply of raw materials.You will find dozens of lorries supplying raw materials to them every day. 
There are similar spaces among the molecules . 
Variations in the offspring is the characteristic of reproduction . 
Video: CV 
Organisms which possess simple cells with primitive nucleus are called prokaryotes . 
The tale tells about a time Mangus climbed a mountain to rescue a lamb and he found that the iron nails in his sandals stuck to pieces of a particular rock . 
Ferromagnetism 
Asteroids are clearly not planets as they have irregular shapes and they are not spherical. Some dwarf planets are spherical, but they do not meet the third criterion. With their weak gravities they are unable to clear out other objects from their orbits. Which famous ex-planet is now considered a dwarf planet because it failed to meet the third criterion? 
The Mongolians observe Moon Cake1 festival and the Chinese observe Chinese New Year . 
Every year we experience them one after another : summer , rainy season , autumn , late autumn , winter and spring . 
IUPAC system 
The main source of energy on the earth is the sun . 
The pointed tool pierced his eyes and he lost his eye sight . 
The speed of light in glass.bit.ly/fcfJVZ 
Animals can be preserved if the conditions are just right . 
Reproduction is most important for continuation of human race. You know that reproduction takes place by the fusion of male and female gametes. 
Substituting OA = u, OC = AD = t and BD = at, we get 
Musicians of this division have achieved national and international acclaim . 
Plenty of fish was available in rivers and canals . 
I twist my wrists right and left . 
But during that time , completely , opposite condition prevails in the southern hemisphere . 
. Do you think it is important to preserve the lifestyle of the tribals? Why? AS 
Because of absence of normal functioning of life activities and ability to become crystallized they seem to be non living . 
recognize the diversity of food in different places by understanding the points that decide the food system . 
India 's golden era in the game lasted from to during which India won consecutive gold medals at Olympic Games . 
Dip your finger and observe the finger from the side of the tumbler . 
Temperature needed to preserve the packet . 
. Identify the different types of work that are related to farming and those that are not. List these in a table. 
The performances draws from the epics like Ramayana and Mahabharata and local legend with raucous humor and wisecracks about current events. For epics, the troupe uses regional versions. Very rarely, they write new stories. Performers are mostly wandering troupes. They wander for nine months in a year from village to village giving performances in return for money and grains. 
What discoveries did Galileo make using his telescope? 
Chaityalayas , temples , mathas and agraharas were the centers of education . 
Water changes into vapour due to the heat of the sun . 
Laxmi says that sedimentation and decantation are used at home while cleaning rice and pulses for cooking. Describe the sediments in this process. 
METHOD: 
It should be white coloured . 
Kabaddi word is derived from word . 
Tapping from the back a ) Heel touch b ) Shoulder touch c ) Tapping defensive skills . 
CHAPTER : CONSUMER RIGHTS 
They love a dry weather alternating with wet weather . 
II . 
Among them , the party which gets the highest number of representatives forms the government and run the administration . 
A bus on a straight road starts from rest at a bus stop and accelerates at until it reaches a speed of . Then the bus travels for at a constant speed until the driver sees the next bus stop in the distance. The driver applies the brakes, stopping the bus in a uniform manner in . 
A group of Yellow Birds is formed with girls aged between six and ten . 
Adapted from several essays by Baker published in Economic Geography in the s. 
Until about years ago there was little scientific knowledge in the West about nutrition. The founder of modern science of nutrition was Frenchman named Lavoisier ( to )whose 
Yes , it has become hot . 
Malekudia tribals are found in Kodagu and Dakshina Kannada districts . 
Let us understand the meaning , features , merits and demerits of these economic systems . 
On the other hand , the death rate among different ages is not the same . 
If the number of guests is more and accommodation is not enough , the buffet service may be introduced . 
One day the people of the town came to cut the trees . 
Aim 
Fig. . Convection of heat in water 
The atmosphere of venus is made up of thick white and yellowish clouds of sulphuric acid. Do you think life can exist on this planet? 
What we have learnt 
(i) Various producers/companies in the industry 
DO YOU KNOW ? 
The longitude that passes through Greenwich in England is called the Prime Meridian ( o ) . 
Sometimes people create machines to perform tasks for them, like this Skittles sorting machine.bit.ly/cx 
Samyukta , who was deeply in love with Prithviraj , ignored all the princes assembled for the swayamvara , went to the palace gate and garlanded the statue of Prithviraj . 
The carving of ' Arjuna 's Meditation ' has emerged as an excellent work of art . 
Animals of the Phylum Porifera are simplest multi - cellular animals . 
What is your conclusion? (What is your answer to the investigative question?) 
Between the digestive tract and the body wall there is a body cavity enclosed in a special membrane , which was seen first in these animals . 
Aristotle , one of the greatest scholars of Greece , was his teacher . 
Mature cells are dead and without nucleus and protoplasm . 
. Describe the most important features of the culture of your region, focusing on buildings, performing arts and painting. 
The teacher will explain the game of memory power . 
There is no matrix in this tissue . 
Small children play with other children together , go to school together . 
Indicators 
So these charges i . e electricity in them is called statical electricity . 
He had been shot by the police.Maya was shocked. -Why?-she asked. 
Below is a block with different properties of metals and non-metals in it. They have been jumbled and are not sorted. You need to decide whether these properties describe metals or non-metals and sort them into the columns in the table which has been provided. Make sure that all the properties in the block are in your table. If you can think of properties that are not listed in the block, you may also add them to the table. 
coloured green while others are 
Drinking milk will also keep the teeth strong . 
For obtaining silk, moths are reared and their cocoons are collected to get silk threads. 
a. Which is the disease ? 
The ponds and rivers ow full of water . 
Water potential gradient is the difference in the water potential of two liquids. Water potential is the potential of water to move from one area to another due to differences in pressure, solutes dissolved in the water and other factors. The water potential gradient between two solutions has a direct effect on the rate of osmosis the bigger the gradient, the faster osmosis occurs in the direction of the gradient, i.e. always from a high to low water potential. 
Commerce, Media and Cricket Today 
The rst word refers to name of the genus and the second to the name of the species . 
closed switch b ) c ) d ) e ) f ) III . 
Changes in size and shape are physical changes in matter . 
Digestive Glands and their Function The glands outside the alimentary canal that produce juice , which help in the digestion of food are called digestive glands . 
What do you feel ? 
The area of the drainage basin of these three rivers is 16 , 00 , 000 square kilometres altogether of which only 7 . 5 percent area is in Bangladesh . 
Take 100 ml water in each container . 
While wandering about on the third floor they entered a shop that was selling branded ready-made clothes.The security guard looked at them as if he wanted to stop them but he did not say anything. They looked at some dresses and then looked at the price tag. None of them was less than Rs ,, almost five times the weekly market price! Sujata whispered to Kavita, I ll take you to another shop which has good quality ready-made clothes at more reasonable prices . 
d Country S: All the major economic decisions about the country are taken by officials of the central bank which the ministers cannot change. 
Salts of a strong acid and a strong base are neutral with pH value of . On the other hand, salts of a strong acid and weak base are acidic with pH value less than and those of a strong base and weak acid are basic in nature, with pH value more than . 
Calcium chloride reacts with carbonic acid to produce calcium carbonate and hydrochloric acid according to the following equation: 
TISCO was set up at an opportune time. All through the late nineteenth century, India was importing steel that was manufactured in Britain. Expansion of the railways in India had provided a huge market for rails that Britain produced. For a long while, British experts in the Indian Railways were unwilling to believe that good quality steel could be produced in India. 
CHAPTER Standard : Physical and Chemical Changes Chapter Outline . CHANGES IN MATTER . EVIDENCE OF PHYSICAL CHANGE . EVIDENCE OF CHEMICAL REACTIONS . SUMMARY SECTION Standard : Students will understand that chemical and physical changes occur in matter . 
(Fig. .). You might have performed the activity with various objects in 
These are available in the earth 's crust . 
There is a site named Mehrgarh near the fertile plain of Bolan pass which leads to Iran . 
chemical formula 
To run the machine smoothly and regularly it is necessary to oil it twice a week . 
Answer the following in a sentence : . 
Many programmes in radio are conducted by doctors , nutritionists , physiologists . 
As it slowly cools , the igneous rock formed may have crystals , which are very easy to see . 
There are many varieties of living things in the world . 
The chapter 'People as Resource' is an effort to explain population as an asset for the economy rather than a liability. Population becomes human capital when there is investment made in the form of education, training and medical care. In fact, human capital is the stock of skill and productive knowledge embodied in them. 
(b) goods, services and investments between countries. 
Who hate to be left behind, 
There are four factors of production . 
The population of our country is increasing fast . 
Swollen area should be massaged with suitable oil and , if there is no relief , sufficient rest should be provided . 
(d) The Bhils lived in the north-eastern part of the subcontinent. 
South Africa is host to one of the the most advanced optical telescopes in the world, the Southern African Large Telescope (SALT). 
Salivary glands , 1iver and pancreas are the digestive glands . 
If you do not have concentration or interest while studying , unwanted thoughts might come in your mind . 
There are many kinds of information in the world and we all need information to live . 
Campaign Money 
How many are permanent? 
In some materials (e.g. iron), called ferromagnetic materials, there are regions called domains, where the electrons' magnetic fields line up with each other. All the atoms in each domain are grouped together so that the magnetic fields from their electrons point the same way. The picture shows a piece of an iron needle zoomed in to show the domains with the electric fields lined up inside them. 
Its cytoplasm contains different types of vacuoles . 
Write a note on Grama Panchayat . 
Let us read Newspapers 
SKETCH 
Healthcare Native systems of treatment such as Ayurveda , Unani , Siddha medicine , etc. were prevalent in Kerala before the spread of Western medicine . 
Increased percentage of carbon dioxide in air has been linked to global warming. 
Even though the electrons in an atom move so fast that it is not possible to describe their actual 'positions', scientists have been able to figure out patterns in the arrangement of the electrons. These patterns repeat after every th element. 
Such rain is called Acid Rain . 
In addition water is used in heat exchange processes , industries and re extinguishers . 
watch or clock 
How does the activity of these hormones prepare the body to fight or flight ? 
When they come near the sun , they become visible in the form of cloud . 
Qualitative : Helps in knowing the reactants and products only . 
In Karnataka , seventeen inscriptions of Ashoka are found in many places . 
Which glass of water will you drink ? 
Atlas : The first vertebra of the vertebral column is called the atlas . 
RESULTS: 
Underline the word which does not belong to the group : . 
The first train in India ran in from Bombay to Thane about km . 
Mercantile A business enterprise that makes profit primarily through trade, buying goods cheap and selling them at higher prices 
Choose scales to represent distance and time . 
Box 
Fig. A Maru Raika genealogist with a group of Raikas. 
Draw a diagram to show how to set up a zinc-copper cell. Include an ammeter in the external circuit. You must use the following labels: zinc electrode, copper electrode, salt bridge/U-tube, zinc-sulphate solution, copper sulphate solution. [ marks] 
) Mention one cause of bleeding ) Name the different kinds of bleeding ) What is meant by ' Sprain ' ? 
noise pollution Unwanted sound from any source that causes discomfort of any kind is called noise pollution . 
Ozone gas in the upper part of the layer is higher , its temperature decreases . 
Through opium trade the English Illustration of the Opium War East India Company became rich ; but it ruined the Chinese materially and morally . 
Learn about a fascinating reptile found in Australia called the thorny dragonbit.ly/QjCGb 
Aristotle : The great Greek scientist , Aristotle is regarded as the father of Zoology . 
Lustre and sonority are the properties associated with the metals. But there is no need that all metals should posses this property. For example, though mercury is a metal, it is not sonorous. 
Use foot wears and seat belts with proper grip to gain necessary friction . 
Naphthalene ball is obtained from a ) coal gas b ) coke c ) coal tar d ) liquor ammonia . 
Father : Hurry up , children ! 
Fiery looping rain on the Sun (video)bit.ly/qmriQ 
(a) Wall clock 
Like that of the latitudes , the longitudes can also be divided into minutes and seconds . 
They clean their cattle ; paint their horns and decorate them according to their taste . 
The process of preparation of crystals is called crystallization . 
Discrimination: When we do not treat people equally or with respect we are indulging in discrimination. It happens when people or organisations act on their prejudices. Discrimination usually takes place when we treat some one differently or make a distinction. 
Learner-dependent answer. Must show males and females next to each other for each type of cancer, with a space between each cancer type. Graph must have a heading, axis should be labelled correctly: x-axis- cancer type, y-axis- percentage. There should be a key which identifies which bar represents males and which bar represents females. 
(ii) Upper layer of the soil (b) All kinds of soil 
Calcium is more needed for grown up children . 
(ii) When do you find that the sun rises earlier? 
hydrochloric acid + sodium hydroxide sodium chloride + water 
From sound to mechanical energy : Using ultrasonic sound wave ( sound of very high frequency ) high precession machinery is cleaned . 
Which of the salts in this reaction are soluble? 
Examine . 
LET S WORK THESE OUT 
These seasons are : Summer , Rain and Winter . 
Which table summarises all the elements known to humankind according to their chemical properties? 
For example , in spite of the predominance of the public sector in Bangladesh , a large number of big industries and financial institutions are managed under private ownership . 
Twinkling of stars 
It keeps the blood thin enough to flow through blood vessels . 
Pour litre of water into each of three beakers. 
reduction in inequalities : Nonexistence of private property and accumulation reduces economic inequality in a socialistic economy . 
. Write the steps you would use for making tea. Use the words solution, solvent, solute, dissolve, soluble, insoluble, filtrate and residue. 
We use many electrical appliances in our daily life . 
The external covering of a human body is the skin . 
Suppose , to lift up your book , a force of 10 Newton need to be applied . 
So often we make promises to other people and work very hard to keep them, but when we make promises to ourselves we often neglect to honour these. 
semipermeable membrane . 
b ) Earthworms move with the help of body muscles and . 
Some major advantages of single ownership business are simple organizational structure , small capital , quick decision making , flexibility in business , efficient management , maintaining secrecy etc . 
I saw a tiger also . 
They used to exploit and oppress the people of East Pakistan in various ways . 
An abandoned car quickly rusts and corrodes near the sea. http://www.flickr.com/photos/mikebaird// 
Introduction of new laws and administrative institutions 
. The river which joins Chenab in Pakistan. 
Concept map 
Usually , chemotherapy , radiotherapy and surgical interventions are initiated either as individual or combination therapy . 
Take note of the pattern and draw it below. 
Look at the pictures and put ( ) mark in the box provided and also How do write which materials they are made of . 
It is observed that not a single human being can live without such social relationship . 
Delhi during Shah Jahan s time was also an important centre of Sufi culture. It had several dargahs, khanqahs and idgahs. Open squares, winding lanes, quiet cul-de-sacs and water channels were the pride of Delhi s residents. No wonder the poet Mir Taqi Mir said, The streets of Delhi aren t mere streets; they are like the album of a painter. 
But the unused labour cannot be stored . 
But such an idea is wrong . 
. Production: 
A demonstration of this experiment can be found here.bit.ly/EMVTl 
Competencies ) Understanding the importance of the history of the divisions of Karnataka , the districts of each division and their significance . 
About half believed they were true and the other half believed they were not. 
Since the sun is the near most star , its distance from the earth is about 15 crore kilometres . 
The right lung is slightly larger than the left lung . 
Why is it dipping ? 
Electricity can be generated from this . 
Example . Relative density of silver is .. The density of water is kg m . What is the density of silver in SI unit? 
List materials which conduct electricity. [ marks] 
Is this what you thought would happen? Refer back to your hypothesis. 
He suppressed the revolt of the Hoysala King Vishnuvardhana . 
If the woods of doors and windows are burnished , they should be cleaned by dusters . 
In this way , normally , a number of muscles of the body get exercise . 
Simple Epithelial Tissue : On basement membrane the cells are arranged in a single layer . 
Fig. Victoria Terminus, Bombay 
Picture . The story of Rajendra Singh 
Now,let's try to predict the products of the reaction. We know that water will be one of the products. 
It works as an excretory organ by way of sweating . 
The oxygen content in capillaries is low , while the carbon dioxide content is high . 
An area surrounded by four walls only cannot be called a home . 
Suddenly it looked down into the water and saw another dog carrying a big bone in its mouth . 
Mass of luggage, m = kg and displacement, s = . m. 
Mature ovary forms the a ) seed c ) carpel b ) stamen d ) fruit . 
As a result , Asia has a wide variety of climates . 
from her/his mouth 
Descriptions of bacteria , nerve cell , Hydra , Volvax , etc . were written by him on observations through his microscope . 
Maximising the use of natural breeze and light by keeping the windows open. 
You can see the structure of hand which is well suited to catch or hold . 
The cream of first category becomes short lasting on the skin . 
. Speed of sound 
ampere 
de ne indicators . 
Fig. 
Dolphins 
When V these four conditions are properly present in a person , only then the health will be good . 
Ermine Type of fur. 
Carbonic acid is added to soft drinks to make it fizzy. The carbonic acid decomposes and forms carbon dioxide (CO) 
These are inherited . 
Connect electrical sources in series to get high voltage as required . 
Branches from the veins are called veinlets . 
. Three liquids are given to you. One is hydrochloric acid, another is sodium hydroxide and third is a sugar solution. How will you identify them? You have only turmeric indicator. 
Name - . 
All citizens have the equal opportunity to enter the government service . 
Some of them decompose dead bodies of organisms . 
Activity . 
Plains An extensive high land above the sea level with gentle slope is known as Plains . 
Advertisements of drugs on public media should be banned . 
That was the time when Buddha lived . 
) Understanding and Collecting information about courts at different levels . 
The Pakistani army arrested Bangabandhu on that very night . 
ventricles: the lower left and right chambers of the heart 
Experiment No . 
[Fig. .(a)]. It begins the process of reproduction by the division of its nucleus into two nuclei [Fig. .(b)]. This is followed by division of its body into two, each part receiving a nucleus [Fig. .(c)]. Finally, two amoebae are produced from one parent amoeba 
Bharat award for boys below years . 
Gold 
Up there in cold the clouds condense into ice . 
This can be done by sinking shallow or deep tube - wells and also by digging canals from rivers , lakes etc . 
Fallopian tube (oviduct): a tube extending from the ovary to the uterus to transport a mature ovum 
Grow in the same type of container 
Jupiter emits radio signals . 
In Bihar , the problem of inoccupation is continuously decreasing . 
The cast fossil will physically look like the original organism on the outside . 
Deforestation and the pollution by industries are the main cause for such natural calamity . 
Initially he helped his Uncle in business . 
The entire body should be rhythmical . 
is caused by wearing Proper disposal of hazardous wastes The use of excessive amounts of fertilizers may decrease the productivity of the soil . 
Column A 
It separates a court into front zone and back zone . 
Complete the table . 
The main function of a ower is reproduction . 
If we spend the money in a planned way , the wastage will be checked . 
What is the magnitude of the buoyant force experienced by a body? Is it the same in all fluids for a given body? Do all bodies in a given fluid experience the same buoyant force? The answer to these questions is contained in Archimedes principle, stated as follows: 
A chord of rope or cloth should be tightly tied just above the bite , that is about 23 inches above the bite , which should be loosened for one minute every half hour . 
Industrial waste materials must not be allowed to flow into the water . 
Repeat the same experiment using a large size ( g ) cylindrical tin completely lled with sand . 
This molecule will have all the properties of oxygen gas . 
He completed his studies in Imperial school . 
We measure time by using diffrent instruments like electronic clocks, digital clocks, etc. 
Stratosphere 
Those of us who live in cities use gas for cooking . 
Shape of the earth The land and water bodies are unevenly distributed between the Northern and the Southern hemispheres . 
In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, European countries were searching for spices and textiles, which had become popular both in Europe and West Asia. The English, Dutch and French formed East India Companies in order to expand their commercial activities in the east. Initially great Indian traders like Mulla Abdul Ghafur and Virji Vora who owned a large number of ships competed with them. However, the European Companies used their naval power to gain control of the sea trade and forced Indian traders to work as their agents. Ultimately, the English emerged as the most successful commercial and political power in the subcontinent. 
to the people who buy old things . 
The Highland Region : This region , is found in the Ethiopian highland and East Africa . 
. Label parts of diagrammes given in page , And identify which one is plant cell and which one is animal cell. (AS) 
The allotrope of sulphur which has elastic property is . 
How can gas pressure be measured? 
non-renewable energy source 
Grains are separated from their stalks by threshing . 
. The Mesopotamian Civilisation Mesopotamian civilisation flourished in the area that lies in a valley between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers in modern Iraq . 
Gold mining in South Africa 
Take two glass jars and fill them with water. 
This is called oxygen cycle . 
An element exists in different forms possessing different physical properties and same chemical properties . 
Their resistance grew into protests . 
Sign on Durban beach in English, Afrikaans and Zulu In English it reads: City of Durban Under section of the Durban beach by-laws, this bathing area is reserved for the sole use of members of the white race group 
A paper-making factory. http://www.flickr.com/photos/@N// 
It generated a new awakening in the intellectual field . 
Whichever places the horse wandered into , the king of that land would accept the sovereignty of the horse 's owner and pay tributes to him . 
Many metals are good electric conductors . 
Oil Ghee Honey Butter Food items that make us strong Rice , ragi , jowar , wheat , millets , oil , ghee , sugar , jaggery , meat etc. , give us strength . 
Identify the reactants and products 
North and Central Chile coastal region has warm summers and mild winters with rainfall in winter . 
Light travels slower through different mediums such as glass, water and air. 
High quality talcum powder is slippery and brightened white in colour . 
fragments Fragmentation in Spirogyra . 
Aim 
As a result , muscle weakness and nerve weakness , problems in digestion of food occur . 
Produce two pulses at slightly different times and observe what happens 
On the trees near roads, compare the incidence of lichen on the side facing the road and on the side away from the road. 
Why must the different conductors have the same length and thickness? 
Equator : The imaginary line lying midway between the poles , which encircles the earth from west to east . 
Taproot system: root system comprising one primary root and many secondary roots branching off the primary root. Examples of taproots include carrot and beetroots where the roots serve a storage function. Taproots are found in dicotyledonous plants. 
Pascal , a French scientist , conducted a good number of experiments on liquid pressure . 
This phenomenon is called rectilinear propagation of light . 
You find again that hydrogen is formed in the reaction. However, such reactions are not possible with all metals. 
In the peace negotiations in Geneva that followed the French defeat, the Vietnamese were persuaded to accept the division of the country. North and south were split: Ho Chi Minh and the communists took power in the north while Bao Dai s regime was put in power in the south. 
This is because different types of materials are made by different types of metals . 
Select 200 germinating gram seeds for this experiment . 
As citizens we have the freedom to travel to any part of the country. We are free to reside and settle in any party of the territory of India. Let us say a person who belongs to the state of Assam wants to start a business in Hyderabad. He may not have any connection with that city, he may not have even seen it ever. Yet as a citizen of India he has the right to set up base there. This right allows lakhs of people to migrate from villages to towns and from poorer regions of the countries to prosperous regions and big cities. The same freedom extends to choice of occupations. No one can force you to do or not to do a certain job. Women cannot be told that some kinds of occupations are not for them. People from deprived castes cannot be kept to their traditional occupations. 
Sometimes the young also express their views . 
As shown in the picture how much of water is used by you and your family members ? 
Extrcting the peel from an onion 
This method is resorted to when a specified number of electors demand direct law making by themselves . 
The conductivity of an electrolyte is therefore affected by the following factors: 
We must prevent our personal and national wastage through conservation of energy . 
Observing Algae 
The fury of flood and draught is always there . 
Sign 
Further , I cut each square piece into four square pieces . 
What does happen if force is not applied ? 
What happens to the smoke from the paper? 
This is called as growth . 
AIDS is not a contagious disease . 
activities : . 
ammeter 
(i) South (ii) North (iii) East 
The incident rays of light diverge to be reflected on the retina . 
One sheet of white paper . 
Who has taught this bird to build such a beautiful nest ? 
(b) All non-metals are ductile. 
In day-to-day life, we consider any useful physical or mental labour as work. Activities like playing in a field, talking with friends, humming a tune, watching a movie, attending a function are sometimes not considered to be work. What constitutes work depends on the way we define it. We use and define the term work differently in science. To understand this let us do the following activities: 
Homer , the blind poet , wrote two great epics ' Iliad ' and ' Odyssey ' . 
General equation for the reaction of an acid with a metal oxide 
Styles of clothing also emphasised differences between men and women. Women in Victorian England were groomed from childhood to be docile and dutiful, submissive and obedient. The ideal woman was one who could bear pain and suffering. While men were expected to be serious, strong, independent and aggressive, women were seen as frivolous, delicate, passive and docile. Norms of clothing reflected these ideals. From childhood, girls were tightly laced up and dressed in stays. The effort was to restrict the growth of their bodies, contain them within small moulds. When slightly older, girls had to wear tight fitting corsets. Tightly laced, small-waisted women were admired as attractive, elegant and graceful. Clothing thus played a part in creating the image of frail, submissive Victorian women. 
The ower of Raf esia plant is the largest ower . 
Keywords 
After days Pit Our findings : 
ductile: the property of a material that allows it to be pulled and stretched out into thin wires 
During his time , on account of continual attacks by the Shakas , the empire stood devastated . 
INSTRUCTIONS: 
Gopal: 
Write in your own words what is meant by the terms invisible , physically demanding , and time consuming ? Give one example of each based on the household tasks undertaken by women in your home. 
Fahrenheit scale Celsius scale HEAT AND LIGHT The .. . 
Living organisms : ( living plant or animal life ) , are an important part of soil . 
Once the box is moving static friction is replaced by another frictional force , which acts to stop the surfaces from sliding . 
Globe Features of a Globe The globe is a miniature model of the Earth . 
Does it fall in the direction of the source of light or in the direction opposite to the light source ? 
They lack membrane-bound organelles . 
They gave a call to overcome them . 
Because when we do any work , we have to use both our hands . 
Like kalia chicken should be cut into eight pieces for korma . 
Which is your favourite one ? 
Prosperous farmers from Maharshtra 
Have you ever experienced the hail storm? 
The learner representing the Earth: stand in an open space. 
b ) Even though nerves are absent , unicellular organisms can respond to stimuli . 
Find out whether and for how long your state was part of these pan-regional empires. 
Fish , frog and so on are chordates ; while amoeba , earthworm , cockroach , snail and so on are non - chordates . 
Now gently remove these dark particles from the magnet and collect them in a sheet of paper. These are iron filings. 
What is a circuit? 
Metamorphic rocks found in Utah are marble , gneiss ( pronounced nice ) , and schist . 
The desert tortoise lives in the hot desert . 
Ponds , canals , swamps , rivers , seas , haors , baors , etc . are the sources of water . 
a ) sulphur . 
Soap is taken off from the top . 
The body of a tadpole is divided into three parts , a rounded head , a small narrow trunk and a flat tail . 
people of that state . 
Cells of apical bud are meristamatic cells . 
Figure . Investigating the conditions under which iron rusts. In tube A, both air and water are present. In tube B, there is no air dissolved in the water. In tube C, the air is dry. 
A solution is a homogeneous mixture of two or more substances. You come across various types of solutions in your daily life. Lemonade, soda water etc. are all examples of solutions. Usually we think of a solution as a liquid that contains either a solid, liquid or a gas dissolved in it. But, we can also have solid solutions (alloys) and gaseous solutions (air). In a solution there is homogeneity at the particle level. For example, lemonade tastes the same throughout. This shows that particles of sugar or salt are evenly distributed in the solution. 
Pushyagupta , a governor during the reign of Chandragupta Maurya had built ' Sudarshan Sarvor ' , a dam in Junagdh of Gujarat . 
A good soap is needed for cleaning clothes . 
Like leaves , flowers also have stalk . 
For division we subtract the exponents and divide the terms. Using our result from the previous step we get: 
Every one of us is engaged in different professions . 
IV . 
For radio transmission two types of wave are used . 
Option : Fruit loops 
The amount of solar energy the Earth receives is calledinsolation which comes from the words: incoming solar radiation 
Again , in , the viceroy of Portuguese Antonio Noronha entered Ullal . 
Young or old will live peacefully together . 
Katihar . 
This paste is used in flooring , constructing and plastering the walls of the houses . 
Each carpel consists of a stigma, style and ovary. Some flowers have one carpel, and some have many. Therefore in some flowers, the carpel and the pistil are the same thing, but in others, many carpels make up one pistil! 
decomposers 
In Halagali most of the villagers were Bedanayakas who possessed arms for hunting and self-defence . 
The outside pressure on the same surface of mercury is the atmospheric pressure . 
He was arrested in and escaped from Hazaribagh jail the following year and went underground . 
(ii) Reaction with a base: Like mineral acids, ethanoic acid reacts with a base such as sodium hydroxide to give a salt (sodium ethanoate or commonly called sodium acetate) and water: 
Figure . : Tropical Deciduous Forest 
Principal axis : convex lens Fig. . The imaginary line passing through the centres of curvature C and C is called the principal axis . 
Can you identify and write the eld of their achievement . 
. Choose the correct option from the following: 
Clue : This element is represented by atomic number . Write its symbol in the fifth block. See if you can find out the name of this element and write it down below. 
CHAPTER HEAT Heat Effects of heat Temperature Rise in temperature Thermal expansion Change of state Chemical change Thermometer Temperature scale Laboratory Clinical Celsius scale Fahrenheit scale Kelvin scale You have studied earlier that heat is a form of energy . 
Toaster 
If it is wrong , write below the picture why it is wrong . 
This process of becoming yellow is called Chlorosis . 
The language that they and other foreigners used became famous as ' Dakani ' . 
Exchange rates They link national currencies for purposes of international trade. There are broadly two kinds of exchange rates: fixed exchange rate and floating exchange rate 
Cools the plant down Excessive water loss causes the plant to wilt 
fewer girls than boys are allowed to study in higher classes. 
Bats 
Measuring utensils - Teaspoon , tablespoon , cup , glass , and one set measuring utensils . 
Label the model and display it in your classroom . 
(vi) The activities in primary, secondary and tertiary sectors are_ [independent / interdependent] 
General equation for the reaction of an acid with a metal carbonate 
However , there is a repulsive force among the molecules due to which they tend to move away from one another . 
Each group must present their poster to the rest of the class. 
Reheat this residue strongly . 
Write their symbols and uses . 
INSTRUCTIONS : 
Within the lungs, the passage divides into smaller and smaller tubes which finally terminate in balloon-like structures which are called alveoli. The alveoli provide a surface where the exchange of gases can take place. The walls of the alveoli contain an extensive network of blood-vessels. As we have seen in earlier years, when we breathe in, we lift our ribs and flatten our diaphragm, and the chest cavity becomes larger as a result. Because of this, air is sucked into the lungs and fills the expanded alveoli. The blood brings carbon dioxide from the rest of the body for release into the alveoli, and the oxygen in the alveolar air is taken up by blood in the alveolar blood vessels to be transported to all the cells in the body. During the breathing cycle, when air is taken in and let out, the lungs always contain a residual volume of air so that there is sufficient time for oxygen to be absorbed and for the carbon dioxide to be released. 
Aurangzeb , who was orthodox in outlook , did not encourage painting . 
. Slums 
The resources of the earth are also meant for the use of unknown number of generations yet to come . 
The glass has a big hole in it , surrounded by a web of cracks . 
Fig. A printer s workshop, sixteenth century. 
Coastal People is hearing about cyclone from radio . 
(b) It appears white on rotating 
Families living in dense forests or hilly areas are called Tribal community . 
In preceding sections, we learnt about some simple electric circuits. We have noticed how the current through a conductor depends upon its resistance and the potential difference across its ends. In various electrical gadgets, we often use resistors in various combinations. We now therefore intend to see how Ohm s law can be applied to combinations of resistors. 
Figure .: Diagram of a root hair cell 
The general reaction of an acid with a metal hydroxide 
It means temperature of an object is a measure of how much hot or cold the object is . 
The stories are taken from Puranas , Ramayana , Mahabharata and local folklore . 
Represent each of the following molecules using its chemical formula, structural formula and the ball-and-stick model. 
New words 
From finding food to eating it 
By February the new government established its power throughout the country . 
As our demand for energy increases, we need to look for more and more sources of energy. We could develop the technology to use the available or known sources of energy more efficiently and also look to new sources of energy. Any new source of energy we seek to exploit would need specific devices developed with that source in mind. We shall now look at some of the latest sources of energy that we seek to tap, and the technology designed to capture and store energy from that source. 
Different functions require different materials . 
Political level This is the prevalence of democratic principles at the level of administration and government . 
Types of interactions 
They may have one or more electric devices as well . 
A kind of milky white liquid or extracts come out from the bark of certain trees . 
In this way , the furniture of other rooms should be set in proper places according to their use . 
) Know the rivers and lakes of South America . 
Harpoon-a weapon to hunt seals 
(c) MNCs 
The infamous Agartala Conspiracy Case was started against him after he was arrested . 
The pointer comes down when the spring increases in length on application of force . 
Do you know? 
Human wants are unlimited . 
. Do you agree that green revolution made India self dependent in terms of food grains . 
Physical Characteristics Most of Antarctica lies - m above the sea level . 
They can be categorised as semi skilled labourers . 
When you look at any fabric, it appears to be a single, continuous piece. Now look at it closely; what do you notice? 
Nayak , M.V.Seethramaiah , B.G.L. Swamy , K.V.Subanna , U.R. Ananthamurthy , Baraguru Ramachandrappa , Centinarain Venkatasubbaiah , G.S. Shivarudrappa , Dalit poet Siddalingaiah , Dr. D.R. Nagaraja , Ki . 
It can be coloured brightly and hence is easily visible. 
Add - ml of vinegar and place the lid back on. 
As you know , healthy food includes carbohydrates , proteins , lipids , vitamins , minerals and roughage.The food which includes the essential nutrients in a definite quantity is termed as balanced diet . 
b. The Constitution cannot be changed under any circumstances. 
Meat : Animals such as goat , sheep , pig , poultry birds , prawn , crab etc. yield flesh as food . 
Averages 
. Project 
QUESTIONS: 
These organisms are called fungi. They have a different mode of nutrition. They secrete digestive juices on the dead and decaying matter and convert it into a solution. Then they absorb the nutrients from it. This mode of nutrition in which organisms take in nutrients in solution form from dead and decaying matter is called saprotrophic nutrition. Plants which use saprotrophic mode of nutrition are called saprotrophs. 
air 
Initiative Initiative means the direct involvement of the people themselves in the law making process when legislature commits mistakes or defaults in law making . 
is E.g. : Green Euglena . 
Could you explain . 
The human brain is the most developed among all animals . 
Colour with blue litmus 
Lala Lajapath Roy , Balgangadhar Tilak and Bipin Chandra Pal were the leaders of this group and were popularly known as Lal-Bal-Pal . 
.. The significance of health 
According to plant scientist , the reason is that a phytohormone named auxin is produced in the apical bud which promotes cell elongation in stem and inhibits the growth of lateral buds . 
(a) to the right. 
Battle of Plassy ( CE ) Bengal was the prosperous province of the Mughal Empire . 
Different types of animals that live in our surroundings have their own food habits (way of taking in food and type of food taken). 
For example , grass can obtain a maximum of 2 percent of the sunrays for its body growth . 
testes 
The lymphatic system is composed of lymph vessels, lymph ducts, lymph nodes and organs. The organs associated with the lymphatic system are the spleen and thymus. The spleen is the boundary between the blood and the lymphatic system. Knots of lymphatic tissue in the spleen add lymphocytes to the blood. The spleen also acts as a filter for the blood, and helps to destroy worn out red-blood cells. In the event of damage to the spleen, it can be removed and its functions will be carried out by the liver, the bone marrow and the lymph nodes. 
If a cross section of a root with the root hairs is examined under a compound microscope a continuous connection of conducting cells between the root hair and the central pith would be revealed . 
After he took over the power , he built a new army including Muslim soldiers who had archery and horse taming skills . 
how each tissue type looks under the microscope 
What is a planetary nebula? 
The manufacture of chemicals is carried out in industries . 
On heating gypsum at K, it loses water molecules and becomes calcium sulphate hemihydrate (). This is called Plaster of Paris, the substance which doctors use as plaster for supporting fractured bones in the right position. Plaster of Paris is a white powder and on mixing with water, it changes to gypsum once again giving a hard solid mass. 
What are they made of ? 
Read and know why . 
INSTRUCTIONS: 
When you blow into a paper bag, why does the bag pop or start to leak air after a while? 
His novel Hard Times () describes Coketown, a fictitious industrial town, as a grim place full of machinery, smoking chimneys, rivers polluted purple and buildings that all looked the same. Here workers are known as hands , as if they had no identity other than as operators of machines. Dickens criticised not just the greed for profits but also the ideas that reduced human beings into simple instruments of production. 
introduce yourself to the method of food production in plants , life cycle and different types of plants . 
Many hundred years ago, people used to measure distances with their hand-spans, strides or foot-spans. One day a very tall man went to a shop to buy some cloth. He asked for three-and-a-half arms length of cloth. The shopkeeper measured three arm lengths of cloth and then added approximately another half-arm length. 
. Kawal sanctuary Adilabad (T.S) Cheetah, tiger, panther, barkingdeer,peacocks, 
Choose a nearby tree or house as a reference point. Draw a picture of your reference point on the paper sheet taken, clearly indicating its location. 
Map 
Take a lighted candle as the object , mirror and a screen . 
The Gram Panchayat 
seven famous astronomers you should know.bit.ly/HJLtb 
If desired this run stitch can also be used in engraved rag . 
Observe your surroundings and list the crops , vegetation and water bodies , if any . 
Write letters about important issues in science. 
( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) . 
People have been using gypsum in construction work for thousands of years . 
Even we can not walk properly without friction . 
Melani with her daughter. 
Name the capitals of Hoysalas . 
. Give arguments to support or oppose the following assertions: 
The food contains nutrients needed to maintain health and growth of our body . 
The absorbed substances are transported to different parts of the body. Water and some salts are absorbed from the undigested food in the large intestine. 
This value orientation creates a thought process . 
and prepare a document on evolutionary history . 
Symbols of electric Components 
To perform different functions , size and nature of cells differ from each other . 
battery: a group of two or more electric cells connected together 
. : Gautam : GaUtAm : Ga-Gallium U-Uranium Am-Americium : ARUN : ArUN : Ar-Argon U-Uranium N-Nitrogen . 
What causes disease? When we think about causes of diseases, we must remember that there are many levels of such causes. Let us look at an example. If there is a baby suffering from loose motions, we can say that the cause of the loose motions is an infection with a virus. So the immediate cause of the disease is a virus. 
nucleons 
Activity-: Human body and its movement 
Find France in your atlas. The painting below is from a cave in France. This site was discovered by four school children more than a hundred years ago. Paintings like this were made between , and , years ago. Many of these were of animals, such as wild horses, aurochs (an older, wild form of cattle), bison, woolly rhinoceros, reindeer and bear, painted in bright colours. 
. Colour the mandals surrounding your mandal in your district map. AS 
Do you know? 
You would find more types of organisms living in your house than your hair, and more in the pond than your house, more in the lake than your pond and so on. These larger areas are suitable for supporting the life of more organisms. 
Solution : F = ma Acceleration , m = kg , a = ms- F = ? 
Which report explains what will happen? 
Appointing the gazetted and non-gazetted officers of the state government through written exams and interview as per the directions of the state government and the concerned department 's assistant commissioners , Tahasildhars , Deputy Superintend of Police etc. , recruitment rules . 
These are attached with the kidneys . 
We can bring their food on time . 
. Wool 
It is inevitable in a democracy that parties shall be headed by leaders who possess a wider national vision and high democratic values . 
In , inspired by Buddha 's teachings , India 's prominent social philosopher and architect of the constitution , Baba Saheb Dr. B.R.Ambedkar embraced Buddhism . 
Good food means safe , attractive and tasty food . 
Know this : Oxygen is one of the most active elements found on the earth . 
Now the question is why in summer , rivers , ponds , canals , and beels become dry ? 
A fraction is a number which represents a part of a whole and is written as , where is the numerator and is the denominator. A ratio tells us the relative size of one quantity (e.g. the number of moles of reactants) compared to another quantity (e.g. the number of moles of product). ; , etc. Ratios can also be written as fractions as percentages (fractions with a denominator of ). 
Material Combustible Non- combustible 
Children , see there . 
He took it in his hands . 
Speciation may take place when variation is combined with geographical isolation. 
In which recent year foodgrain stock with the government was maximum? 
When a packet is opened and all balls are not taken , the remaining balls may not be damped . 
paper 
(v) The main excretory product in human beings is . 
One day Boojho was eagerly waiting to meet his grandparents who were coming to the town after a year. He was in a real hurry as he wanted to receive them at the bus-stop. He ran fast and reached the bus-stop in a few minutes. He was breathing rapidly. His grandmother asked him why he was breathing so fast. Boojho told her that he came running all the way. But the question got stuck in his mind. He wondered why running makes a person breathe faster. The answer to Boojho s question lies in understanding why we breathe. Breathing is a part of respiration. Let us learn about respiration. 
What could be the reason ? 
The salesman measured metres of the cloth with a metre scale and gave them . 
Amnesty International: An international organisation of volunteers who campaign for human rights. This organisation brings out independent reports on the violation of human rights all over the world. 
On one piece of bread all the grated ingredients with eggs are to be spread with knife . 
transparent: something that you can see through; light passes through the object 
For example , crow , cuckoo , myna , duck , hen , pigeon , sparrow , weaver bird , parrot , kite , vulture , and so on . 
Table - . Poverty ratio ( % ) Numbers of poor ( in crore ) Year Rural Urban Combined Rural Urban Combined - - - - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Source : Economic Survey - , Ministry of Finance , Government of India It is clear from the table . that there is a substantial decline in poverty ratios in India from about per cent in to per cent in . 
Use of too much chemical fertilizer and insecticides are one of the causes of air and water pollution . 
Saudi Arabia is the largest producer of petroleum in the world . 
An example of a ferrofluid, a liquid that can become magnetised in a magnetic field. 
The most impressive remain of Vijayanagara, the Mahanavami Dibba, is a very high platform of feet, that is as tall as a five floor building, and Sq.feet in area. Its height was increased at least three times during two hundred years. The sides of the platform were covered with sculptures of various kinds. It did not have a complete building on the top. The platform was covered by cloth shamiana or pandal supported by wooden pillars. On this platform the Vijayanagara kings held their Navaratri Puja and held their Dussera court in which all their subordinate chiefs, nayakas and officers paid their tributes to the Emperor. Ambassadors from Europe and other sultanates also attended the festival. 
Under this circumstance the Indian Army marched to Hyderabad and an intimidated Nizam signed the Instrument of Accession . 
. always positive 
For this purpose each aerial photograph covers about percent area of the adjacent photographs also . 
You could also ask a geologist to provide you with a variety of rock samples to identify. 
Which type of satellite is used for Doordarsan telecasts ? 
Discovered Homo erectus , the most important link of human evolution . 
direct 
He died in the year . 
Influence of film on the society 
So sodium chloride solution does not change the colour of the indicator . 
Tools and equipment will be easily available in time of need if they are kept in order in a box . 
(b) Hydrogen bromide 
A changing environment 
How many types of sex chromosomes are there ? 
The process of including these aspects and the political and economic system gaining strength around the world is called globalization . 
No money is spent to behave gently with others . 
. Explain the method of sexual reproduction 
Activity : Light an incense stick and allow its smoke to spread inside a jar . 
(v) What do you mean by a rock cycle? 
The experiment on the third piece of land without using fertilizer is called controlled experiment . 
The industrial world was also hit by unemployment that began rising from the mid-s and remained high until the early s. From the late s MNCs also began to shift production operations to low-wage Asian countries. 
Direct balance can be made through keeping two similar designed sofa set in either side of a central point . 
There are different types of joints in our body to help us carry out different movements and activities. Let us learn about them. 
If there is any leakage in the gas burner it should be sealed . 
Formula indicates the names of all the elements present in a compound . 
The narrative is partly based on a research study by Gilbert Etienne of a village in Bulandshahr district in Western Uttar Pradesh. 
The use of labour on farms is limited . 
. The Nazi Cult of Motherhood 
world map given below and find out examples for intervention in specified areas by UN peace keeping force . 
When electrons are transferred from one atom to another it is called ionic bonding. 
Circuit breakers are available in different sizes , and can protect small household appliances as well as high voltage devices . 
The People of Africa 
Motion towards the east is called direct orprograde motion. Backwards motion is called retrograde motion. 
The lymphatic system is part of the circulatory system, comprising a network of inter-connected tubes known as lymphatic vessels that carry a clear fluid called lymph towards the heart. 
use of bore for extracting ( Pollution of freshwater resources . 
Herbs are small plants and their stems are very soft . 
Crops such as wheat are grown in the fine clayey soils, because they are rich in humus and are very fertile. Find from your teachers, parents and farmers the type of soils and crops grown in your area. Enter the data in the following Table .: 
The demonstration that your teacher sets up might look something like this. 
Second Round Table Conference. 
Do plants and animals also require water like us? 
panning: a separation method based on the density gradient of the mixture 
Experiment to prove that Heat is evolved during Respiration : Requirements : One Thermo flask , some germinating Gram seeds and a thermometer . 
Ocean Thermal Energy 
What is the difference between the factors in the offsprings of F generation and factors in the parental plants ? 
A wood carver. 
We just substitute the mass and velocity (which are known) into the equation for kinetic energy: 
camouflage: an adaptation in which an animal can hide by blending in with its surroundings 
Ripple tank apparatus 
Imagine that you are a nawab s nephew and have been brought up thinking that you will one day be king. Now you find that this will not be allowed by the British because of the new Doctrine of Lapse. What will be your feelings? What will you plan to do so that you can inherit the crown? 
Map 
If we add sufficient plants with medicinal values with our food , we can live healthily without diseases . 
While , the east of the Andes gets low rainfall . 
How could you improve this investigation to get more accurate results? 
The central part of the region is a plateau where the South Pole is located . 
Acromegaly Table- . . 
Connect a circuit on a wooden plank or on a thermocol sheet as shown in Fig. . 
Adverse social environment : There is a great lack of education in India . 
Measure the voltage across each resistor in the circuit. 
When soil is poor in nitrogen , plants try to obtain nitrogen by other means . 
There are big rings around it . 
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM 
Are budding and fission the only methods of asexual reproduction in animals? 
e ) Pole turn : Allow min for each team . 
Is this a renewable or non-renewable energy source? Why? 
One end of the rod is kept out in the air and the other is buried deep in the ground as shown in fig-. The rod provides an easy route for the transfer of electric charge to the ground. 
Read the following tabular column carefully and decide which fuel we should use for cooking . 
TYPES OF SOIL The main types of soil found in different regions of India are ALLUVIAL SOIL BLACK SOIL RED SOIL LATERITE SOIL DESERT SOIL I I SOIL FERTILITY Soil contains dead plants and animals , minerals , water and air which make the soil rich and fertile.Plants and trees grow on the of the earth 's surface . 
The Eastern High Lands This region comprises two distinct high lands , a ) the Guiana high lands in the north and b ) the Brazilian high lands in the south . 
Eye is such a wonderful instrument that it (normal) can clearly see distant objects as well as objects nearby. The minimum distance at which the eye can see objects distinctly varies with age. The most comfortable distance at which one can read with a normal eye is about cm. 
classify the sources of water that are suitable for drinking . 
Exercises I. Four alternatives are given under each complete / incomplete statement . 
Questions 
Decline of the Dutch Dutch clashed with the English . 
Look once more at Fig. . Imagine you were a citizen of Frankfurt in March and were present during the proceedings of the parliament. How would you (a) as a man seated in the hall of deputies, and (b) as a woman observing from the galleries, relate to the banner of Germania hanging from the ceiling? 
QUESTIONS: 
a ) tuber : It eg . 
Enlarge the part of the specimen you chose and focus on high power. 
STRUCTURE of A STEM Cuticle - waxy coating Epidermis - barrel shaped cells , gives protection and produces multi cellular epidermal hairs Cortex - it is divided into three layers . 
But at that time , the ocean remains comparatively warm . 
Change the coefficients again to try to balance the equation. 
The law of conservation of mass 
It is the duty of the home manager to take proper care of them . 
Energy sources in usage not for fun My father rode on a cart . 
f We touch and feel each cloth bits of cotton , wool , silk and polyester cloth , a magnifying glass to know the nature ( soft / rough ) . 
Land revenue was the main source of income for the kingdom . 
Tired muscles get rest and their ability increases . 
` Proto ' means ` first ' and ` plasma ' means ` colloid ' . 
Some houses had wells which supplied water . 
Though the Stuarts were Catholics , the Anglican Church supported the Stuarts . 
At that time we feel comfortable if the body is covered with woollen or warm clothes . 
Chlorides , sulphates and carbonates of sodium , potassium , calcium and iron are mixed with the river water . 
The mouth of the pitcher should be tightly and carefully closed with fitting lids or polythene paper , and buried under the soil . 
Generally , forests are indicators of the natural wealth of a nation . 
Electric kettles require current more then 5 ampere . 
This enables the solid to have a definite shape and volume . 
The top end is sealed removing air . 
Activity-: Jaw bone 
Prehistoric : belonging to a period of time before recorded history . 
The process of supplying water to crops in the field at different intervals is called irrigation . 
. An important river of the Indian desert. 
Our Environment 
What causes cancer ? 
Rivers , like the Colorado River , carry enormous loads of sand and soil that is picked up from erosional processes . 
They move from one place to another . 
Let us see where they are located in our country . 
We will take decisions about keeping our area neat and clean . 
The patient should be scrubbed and bathed with warm soap water . 
Introduce a glowing splinter into the jar . 
WRITE THE NAMES OF THE FOLK ARTS RELATED TO THE PICTURES EXERCISE I. CHOOSE THE CORRECT ANSWER . 
. Free Fall 
Try making penguins out of egg shells and eye drop filler caps . 
Use of needle , syringe or other medical / surgical operation related instruments . 
The first four prefixes are listed in the table below: 
Morning Temperature Noon Evening Day Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday activity . 
Denmark is called the country of winds . More than % of their electricity needs are generated through a vast network of windmills. In terms of total output, Germany is the leader, while India is ranked fifth in harnessing wind energy for the production of electricity. It is estimated that nearly , MW of electrical power can be generated if India s wind potential is fully exploited. The largest wind energy farm has been established near Kanyakumari in Tamil Nadu and it generates MW of electricity. 
. What Is Our System of Elections? 
If you have a problem in answering these questions, do the following activities and then try to answer them. 
Artery Vein 
When nationalism was defined on the basis of religion , linguistic identity was raised as a counter-argument . 
Many early novels carried a clear message of social reform. For example, in Indirabai, a Kannada novel written by Gulavadi Venkata Rao in , the heroine is given away in marriage at a very young age to an elderly man. Her husband dies soon after, and she is forced to lead the life of a widow. In spite of opposition from her family and society, Indirabai succeeds in continuing her education. Eventually she marries again, this time a progressive, English-educated man. Women s education, the plight of widows, and problems created by the early marriage of girls all these were important issues for social reformers in Karnataka at that time. 
. Aquifers 
Statement 
Plant cannot grow on that soil . 
The Coastal Plains 
European Union Parliament in Belgium 
A beaker contains a thick liquid . 
What do you observe ? 
All was not well 
On certain subjects, only a State Legislative Assembly can make laws. Hence, different states can have different laws on any of these subjects. For example, Sales Tax is charged on the sale and purchase of goods within a state. This is a major source of revenue for the State Governments. Each state has made its own law for the collection of this tax. Hence there are differences between states in the list of things which are taxed and also in the rates at which they are taxed. 
She estimates that the working capital itself would cost a minimum of Rs . 
Fig. (d) 
Private sector industries owned and operated by individuals or a group of individuals TISCO, Bajaj Auto Ltd., Dabur Industries. 
Our body needs energy even when we are sleeping . 
gene 
How would you describe the elements that are mostly on the left side of the Periodic Table? 
S.N. Bose 
Why E has been selected as the Standard Meridian of India? 
When the pollen tube reaches the embryo sac the tip of the pollen tube bursts and the two male gametes are released . 
Malnourished: A person who does not get adequate nutrition or food. 
c Vijaya thinks that the judiciary is neither independent nor conformist, but acts as a mediator between opposing parties. The court struck a good balance between those who supported and those who opposed the order. 
Property Rights 
The enactment of COPRA has led to the setting up of separate departments of Consumer Affairs in central and state governments. The posters that you have seen are one example through which government spread information about legal process which people can use. You might also be seeing suchadvertisements on television channels. 
The following questions involve calculations based on the equation: 
Plants ask , `` How will you conserve us as we provide food for all living beings ? '' 
Remember that it takes one thousand years to create an inch of topsoil . 
( Some are parasites . 
answer the following after group discussion : . 
But the standard of living of an average Soviet citizen is below that of an American . 
Various pictures , handmade design on the mat are used in the living room . 
a Straight stop a Reverse push a Parallel pass a Indian dribbling Hockey has been identi ed as the most popular sport during pre and post independent era . 
North pole pointing north North pole pointing south agent is equal and opposite . 
Again , there are machines which work to increase motion and distance . 
Do the following actions : 
As a result , our industrial productivity and the quality of our industrial products are low . 
EXERCISES I. Four alternatives are given to each of the following incomplete statements / questions . 
Save the solutions to now test them again with red cabbage indicator paper. 
Here snowfall does not melt and oftentimes causes erosion . 
Vulnerable Species: These are species whose population has declined to levels from where it is likely to move into the endangered category in the near future if the negative factors continue to operate. The examples of such species are blue sheep, Asiatic elephant, Gangetic dolphin, etc. 
In every living cell of the plants respiration continues 24 hours day and night . 
The lower part of the thermosphere is known as ionosphere . 
Drawing gaseous exchange in the alveoli 
. State the characteristics of the image formed by a plane mirror. 
He defeated the Satrapas of Gujarat who were ruling it for more than three centuries . 
Box 
The ancient Greeks knew, as early as in B.C. that when amber (amber is a kind of resin) was rubbed with fur, it attracted light objects such as hair. 
People can go there for long time recreation . 
a 
so that the bottle also becomes 
She was born in Gangamoola of Western Ghats as the daughter of Ananthashastri Dongri and Lakshmibai . 
Write the formulae of the products of this reaction. 
For this investigation, calculate the weight using the formula W = m g, where m is the mass of the object in kg and g is , m/s. We will learn more about this in the next section. 
Product Name of the company Home nation of the company Whether MNC or not . 
) billion years 
That is to say , pressure sensors are triggered by pressure . 
After summer holidays , the school re-opens . 
What is your conclusion ? 
As a result the lateral buds start growing . 
An Indo-Greek coin 
. Structure of the atom 
DO YOU KNOW? 
Likewise , a mother and a sister are female members . 
pradhan mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima yojana : Life insurance scheme aimed at increasing the penetration of life insurance cover in India . 
7 . 2 per cent people are farmers . 
Collect the pictures of vehicles and stick them here . 
Fig. .: Consumption of natural rubber 
Talagunda was a famous Agrahara and Kanchi was a famous Ghatikasthana . 
cost = power rating time price 
Morel http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:False_Morel.jpg 
On the other hand , the ocean water gets heated and cooled very slowly . 
www.futureforests.com/calculators/flightcalculatorshop.asp 
Political History : Athens : Athens was an ideal City State and had decomcracy . 
The Mongols under Genghis Khan invaded Transoxiana in north-east Iran in and the Delhi Sultanate faced their onslaught soon after. Mongol attacks on the Delhi Sultanate increased during the reign of Alauddin Khalji and in the early years of Muhammad Tughluq s rule. This forced the two rulers to mobilise a large standing army in Delhi which posed a huge administrative challenge. Let us see how the two Sultans dealt with this. 
You will be studying about Mendel 's principles of heredity in higher classes . 
Write it in this plate . 
The decision of the Nawab provoked the people who wanted the state to be merged with India . 
If ultraviolet radiation were not absorbed by ozone, it would reach the earth s surface and cause harm to us and other life forms. Ozone acts as a natural shield against this radiation. 
.. How do these Traits get Expressed? 
The monsoons are experienced in the tropical area roughly between N and S. To understand the mechanism of the monsoons, the following facts are important. 
Sometimes , halogen tablets are used to free water from germs . 
Technology is something we see and use everyday. Whenever you talk on your mobile phone, or switch on the TV, or work on your computer, you are using the latest technology. Technology is the practical application of knowledge in our everyday lives that leads to a new product or an improvement in the way something works, or how something is done. Even when you sharpen your pencil, use instruments for cutting and chopping, cook in different vessels, you are using technology. From simple instruments and equipment to all the complicated machinery that we use is part of technology. It could be at home or a factory or for communication and transport. 
Without spilling baking soda , stretch the mouth of the balloon over the mouth of the bottle . 
And everyone says he'll 
Like Mahavira, Gautama Buddha too was born in a ganasangha. He found that people everywhere were miserable and in conflict with each other. He began to think, How can we get rid of this misery? 
POPULATION* 
function for the protection of environment . 
. If you want to develop social forestry in your village which type of plants would you like to grow. Why? 
Small plastic mats can be used under the dinning table . 
Capillaries: Are much narrower than large blood vessels 
Health Most people of the country do not get the opportunity of medical treatment . 
Endoplasmic reticulum forms the supporting framework of the cell . 
Fruits and vegetables should be taken after washing . 
forest which is used for grazing cannot be used for any other purpose and is unable to yield timber and fuel, which are the main legitimate forest produce 
As a result it has been possible to wipe out smallpox from the earth . 
The rib cage is a bony and cartilaginous structure. A typical rib cage consists of ribs ( pairs), the sternum (an inverted T-shaped structure connecting the rib bones), costal cartilages and the thoracic vertebrae shown in the diagram below. The first seven pairs of ribs connect directly to the sternum and are referred to as true ribs. The remaining five pairs of ribs do not connect directly to the sternum and are referred to as false ribs. The rib cage aids in the protection of the heart and lungs. With the help of the diaphragm and the intercostal muscles, they increase and decrease the volume of the thoracic cavity thereby allowing inhalation and exhalation to take place. 
Write a description on the role of physiography of Europe in its growth in the fields of science and technology , and industry . 
the months What will happen during the time of drought ? 
. Fill in the following table to show the services provided by people in the markets which you visit frequently. 
On the other hand a technologist uses the discovery of science for human welfare , as a doctor , or an engineer or a weather scientist does . 
Several empires also ruled in the peninsular plateau . 
) Fore hand grip : In order to receive the shuttles at the right side ( at the center , front and back of the court ) and to serve form right side , a player uses forehand grip . 
Amoeba ingests its food with the help of its false feet or pseudopodia. The food is digested in the food vacuole. 
Mughal period . 
Find out : What happens , if we do not get adequate food ? 
is Four Vedas : Rig-Veda , Sama-Veda , Yajur-Veda and Atharva-Veda are the four Vedas . 
Copper is used for telegraph , telephone and electric line . 
Mule deer live on the slopes of the mountains and eat plants , such as aspens , junipers , and sagebrush . 
You will study more about sun in higher classes . 
The uses of sleep . 
Which situation shows a push and which situation shows a pull? [ mark] 
The area under an acceleration - time graph ( vs. ) gives the velocity. 
Comparing sound generating instruments 
Draw with a chalk two more lines parallel to the previous line such that the distance between any two successive lines is equal to the focal length of the mirror. These lines will now correspond to the positions of the points P, F and C, respectively. Remember For a spherical mirror of small aperture, the principal focus F lies mid-way between the pole P and the centre of curvature C. 
.. Decomposition Reaction 
As a result the programme for birth control will be successful . 
India is a land of many religions . 
Small stalked granular bodies are arranged on the cristae and they are called auxisome . 
Sprinkle water on it every day . 
It increases beauty when used in internal wall or dividing walls . 
There is an Advisory Committee consisting of a team of specialists for this work . 
H H + + e - Proton Electron Thus , proton can be defined as an hydrogen ion ( H + ) ( Ions are charged particles ) . 
Others . % Surface water . % Freshwater % . % Ground water % Glaciers &amp; Ice cap Saline water % Water on Earth Fresh Water Fig. . . 
These are plants which do not prepare food in plant kingdom . 
de ne electronic con guration . 
Let us do - : 
Archaeologists have found traces of huts or houses at some sites. For instance, in Burzahom (in present-day Kashmir) people built pit-houses, which were dug into the ground, with steps leading into them. These may have provided shelter in cold weather. Archaeologists have also found cooking hearths both inside and outside the huts, which suggests that, depending on the weather, people could cook food either indoors or outdoors. 
Your ice cream melts in the sun 
Devasyachan was thinking of buying some land in Malabar for some time . 
The temples of this district are famous for Hoysala architecture . 
Ravi is obese and overweight . 
The main reason for this is that soil provides salts and water required for the plants to prepare their food . 
So animal protein is better than vegetable protein in terms of quality and standard . 
Additional analysis is made of their social and economic ability to handle these risks . 
The inset shows the location of the Maasais in Kenya and Tanzania. 
. Conduct a survey in your locality by supplying the following questionnaire to get an idea as to how alert they are as consumers. 
. Karthik is observing the live telecast of a one day cricket match. He noticed motion of a roller on the pitch during lunch break. He thought about various forces acting on the roller and the net force when it is in motion. Many questions arose in his mind regarding the direction of the net force. Can you guess what would be those questions?(AS) 
In this stage , the daily requirement of calcium phosphorus is about 1 . 2 - 1 . 8gm . 
Torch-light 
Thus, the SHGs help borrowers overcome the problem of lack of collateral. They can get timely loans for a variety of purposes and at a reasonable interest rate. Moreover, SHGs are the building blocks of organisation of the rural poor. Not only does it help women to become financially self-reliant, the regular meetings of the group provide a platform to discuss and act on a variety of social issues such as health, nutrition, domestic violence, etc. 
A small amount of petroleum jelly ( Vaseline ) . 
Application of medication as per physician ' s advice is must . 
His fame had spread beyond India . 
He died at the age of fifty nine . 
Orchard, Plantation, Timber, Firewood, Soil Erosion, Bunds, Deforestation, Tribe 
The British Policy suited their economy but it was against Indian concerns . 
The strength of life enters our body through breath . 
Again , there are some bodies , which are in motion . 
Write them in the correct order in the space given below . 
The lithosphere 
How does the top soil support plants ? 
The feathers on the wings and tail are bigger . 
We will move about carefully . 
Preparation of compost How can we make manure from organic matter ? 
Africa has large varieties of fruit crops . 
What do you know about synthetic fibres? How are they manufactured? Let us discuss about synthetic fibres in detail. 
This information about solar system is known to us for the past to hundred years, after the telescopes were made. But how did the people of olden days know so much about the celestial bodies and also about earth? 
The Northern Plains . 
recognise the components of habitat . 
And Allah resides in the West, 
Children like to eat bakery items and chocolates . 
. What types of soils are there in your village? Make a list of crops grown on these soils. 
It is very fertile as the owing rivers bring fertile soil with them . 
When necessary , mixed arrangement of large and small furniture can be made to create balance . 
Revision Questions 
FACT FILE f The first Government approved Indian cement factory was started in the year at Porbandar in Gujarat by India Cement Ltd. , f Broken glass pieces at Mesopotamia confirms glass in the third century . 
Wrap up the funnel with a wet cloth . 
majority 
Sound waves with frequencies below the audible range are termed infrasonic and those above the audible range are termed ultrasonic . 
We need light to see objects . 
The contraction and expansion of all cardiac muscles take part combindly . 
The nobles and innumerable slaves were under him . 
remote sensing: gathering information from a distance, without making physical contact 
Endoskeleton - Provides shape and structural support. 
Many activities take place in the body of organisms . 
Britain , France and China came together and formed the Allied powers . 
Neem trees do not grow well in areas where water accumulates . 
Neon () 
Box 
Electricity and circuits (video)bit.ly/niR 
Mention the antisocial activities of traders to earn more profit . 
The Mahantheshwara Mutt of Ilkal attracts thousands of devotees . 
The vibrations of the vocal cords produce sound . 
Let s Discuss 
They should allow me to ow into a garden or a soakpit . 
B. Rub a glass rod with a silk cloth and bring the rod near an inflated balloon. Observe what happens. 
Malthus has considered only the horrible side of the growth of population ; he did not foresee its good sides . 
For facilitating communication among the scientists , India in established the first post office outside India in Antarctica in . 
They knew fire and its utilities . 
The south eastern coast of Brazil has tropical deciduous forest . 
. Write lines on the usefulness of microorganisms in our lives. 
Read the cartoon 
QUESTIONS: 
Know this : Chlorine was rst used in the sterilisation of drink - ing water in the th century to control the spread of water-borne diseases such as typhoid , cholera , dysentery and gastro-enteritis ( number of people killed by these diseases was more than the number that were killed in all wars in history . ) 
Draw a frame of reference with house as the origin and write down the positions of houses , , and . 
It is measured in nanometres ( nm = -m ) . 
Compounds that exist as giant repeating lattice structures are called network structures. Examples include covalent molecules such as diamond, graphite and silica. Ionic substances are also network structures, for example a sodium chloride crystal is a huge lattice of repeating units made of sodium and chloride ions. All substances formed as a result of ionic bonding are network structures. Metals exist as large continuous lattice structures and are also classified as network structures. For example copper, zinc and iron can be seen as a giant crystals and are therefore considered to be network structures. 
His earlier name was Vardhamana . 
Actually if we see the Earth from the sky, we will not be able to see any tilt or axis. It will appear just as the Moon or Sun appears to us a round disc. The tilt is the tilt of an imaginary line the axis, and therefore can t be seen visually. 
Cato , Cicero , Seneca were famous philosophers . 
Sociology is a social science and not a physical science : Sociology belongs to the group of social sciences and not to the group of physical sciences . 
Write full form of these abbreviations : ( a ) NSSO ( c ) SHG ( e ) JRY ( g ) MDMS ( i ) PMRY ( b ) MPSE ( d ) SGSY ( f ) IRDP ( h ) NREP ( j ) PMGY Short answer the questions : Answer in words : . 
A beam of white light is shone through a glass prism. It splits up into seven colours which are shone on a screen. A learner took a photograph which is shown below and drew a ray diagram to show the prism. The colours are marked to in the diagram. 
Record your results in the following table: 
The ruins of cities built of stone have been obtained in Yucutan of Mexico , Guatemala and Honduras . 
With this end in view , it is necessary to analyze the population of this country from different standpoints . 
Let s recall 
heart chamber: any of the four spaces of the mammalian heart 
Vast basin shaped volcanic mouth is . 
Record your observations . 
For all time use , glass wares are not proper as they can be easily broken . 
The nature of the metallic bond 
It is an active antioxidant , preventing oxidation of carotene , vitamin A and unsaturated fatty acids . 
symbiotic 
Antimony 
Red bone marrow: Found in the spaces between the trabeculae in spongy bone. This is where the red blood cells are made at the rate of - million per second. White blood cell types are also produced here. 
. The earth and the moon are attracted to each other by gravitational force. Does the earth attract the moon with a force that is greater or smaller or the same as the force with which the moon attracts the earth? Why? 
Insert the pistons back into the syringes. You may apply some vaseline on the pistons before inserting them into the syringes for their smooth movement. 
This linear chain is called the food chain . 
Savings for old age: A part of her salary is kept in a fund with the government. She will earn interest on these savings. When she retires from this job she will get this money and she can then live on that. 
It is equal to the lost volts in the internal resistance of the circuit. 
Today 's report would be different . 
. What social ideas did the following people support. 
Mixtures are substances consisting of two or more substances . 
What is the atmosphere? 
The consumption of wheat by each farmer family is the same (Column ). The whole of surplus wheat this year is used as capital for next year s production. Also suppose, production is twice the capital used in production. Complete the tables. 
Have you ever been advised deworming by a doctor ? 
Source 
This vision is the essence of sustainable development . 
They are also the widow for entertainment soon after harvest season . 
Economics discusses the economic problems and economic activities and indicates proper solution to these problems . 
How do we see? 
Use your toothpick or other object to move the soil looking for what you might find . 
Fig. 
- The sun does not appear during the month of ______ and________ 
Activity . : Look at any object on which light falls . 
vacuoles 
The tricuspid and bicuspid valves allow the blood to pass from the atria to the respective ventricles only . 
For example , the people who are born in India after January , , had become the citizens of India . 
This squirrel lives in tamarind , vagai , naval , neer maruthu and neem trees . 
Newton 's rst law of motion is based on the ndings of Galileo . 
Weight of the boy, 
Have you ever observed dew? Where is it formed? 
These regions are called Pleistocene uplands . 
Some animals can not be classified by outward appearance . 
The story of Palampur, an imaginary village, will take us through the different types of production activities in the village. In villages across India, farming is the main production activity. The other production activities, referred to as non-farm activities include small manufacturing, transport, shop-keeping, etc. We shall take a look at both these types of activities, after learning a few general things about production. 
The order of reactivity is complex and difficult. But it could possibly go like: 
In the event of eviction , compensation for improvement is also available ... From Kadu , by E.M.Kovoor . 
www.cartage.org.lb/en/themes/sciences/physics/mainpage.htm 
Is all of the energy transferred to the heating element useful? [ marks] 
Tejas Honey bee : Oh ! 
The government appoints the executive officer to look after the executive work of Taluk Panchayat . 
Know this : The whale is the biggest one in the animal world . 
Taste Feel Action with litmus paper Corrosiveness Conductivity Action with each other sour irritates / burns skin . 
They also face a number of problems . 
The food we eat undergoes releases chemical energy to enable us to work . 
In order to get rid of dandruff and dead skin , we can wash our hair with limejuice , water boiled with neem leaves , amloki , yoke of egg and ground methi . 
It is the picture of the family of Ramayya and Rajamma which was drawn last year . 
Acidi cation of natural water bodies affects aquatic organisms . 
This is a male religious congregation of the Catholic Church . 
The as it can walk easily in the sand and The camel is called the go without water and food for days together . 
You will observe that the nger which was previously in contact with hot water will now feel cold , whereas the other nger feels hot.It shows the sensation of degree of heat or cold . 
.Fill in the blanks: 
For example : coral , jellyfish , hydra , and so on . 
The outer greyish part of cerebrum is called the grey matter , and the inner white part is called white matter . 
It is a long glass tube filled with gas and sealed at both the ends . 
There were trade links with Rome during Shathavahana period . 
Beetle 
With the help of these pictures list out herbivore , carnivore and omnivore in the chart below . 
. Compare the temple shown in this chapter with any present-day temple in your neighbourhood, highlighting any similarities and differences that 
Now, let's put it all together, first the reactants, then the products: 
Let us learn about some members of the solar system. 
G.A. Henty (-): 
In Town Municipality the number of councillors are between and whereas in City Municipalities the number is between and . 
Sunil Chattri . 
The current is carried to various rooms through these sub circuits using insulated copper or aluminium wire in a ring system , so as to tap at any convenient point in the house . 
Internet banking helps transferring funds from one customer s bank account to another customer s bank account, buying and selling goods, investments for repaying loans and payments of electricity, phone and other utility bills. 
This is a painting by the English painter John Constable ( -). Son of a wealthy corn merchant, he grew up in the Suffolk countryside in east England, a region that had been enclosed much before the nineteenth century. At a time when the idyllic countryside was disappearing, the open fields were being enclosed, Constable painted sentimental images of open countryside. In this particular painting we do see some fences and the separation of fields, but we get no idea of what was happening in the landscape. Constable s paintings usually did not have working people. If you look at Fig., you will see that Suffolk was surrounded by regions where threshing machines were broken in large numbers during the Swing riots. 
Speed 
Not only that, regardless of where we have lived for the past few thousand years, we all come from Africa. The earliest members of the human species, Homo sapiens, can be traced there. Our genetic footprints can be traced back to our African roots. A couple of hundred thousand years ago, some of our ancestors left Africa while others stayed on. While the residents spread across Africa, the migrants slowly spread across the planet from Africa to West Asia, then to Central Asia, Eurasia, South Asia, East Asia. They travelled down the islands of Indonesia and the Philippines to Australia, and they crossed the Bering land bridge to the Americas. They did not go in a single line, so they were not travelling for the sake of travelling, obviously. They went forwards and backwards, with groups sometimes separating from each other, sometimes coming back to mix with each other, even moving in and out of Africa. Like all other species on the planet, they had come into being as an accident of evolution, and were trying to live their lives the best they could. 
Acrylic is artificial wool made from coal, air, water, oil and limestone. 
What is Nationalism ? 
digestion 
Useful materials like plastic , detergents , dyes and paints . 
conduct: to carry impulses from one neuron the next 
. New Developments in Forestry 
This primary knowledge is the main objective for studying biology . 
Write its two . 
Bleaching powder is used 
There were several political parties in Spain with reputation and Communist ideologies . 
You have observed wood , stone , water , milk , smoke and fog in your surroundings . 
Improve your learning 
lithosphere 
ruler 
Note the rise in water . 
) To appreciate the military and cultural achievements of Rashtrakuta kings . 
Make careful observations and describe in detail what happens at each stage. 
They have free RNA without a protein coat . 
Forest area Animals that live in the forest Types of Trees 
What do you see ? 
Your friends A, C are able to see images of each other in the mirror. Why can t you see their images? 
Did it pass through ? 
. Blood transfusions 
What did you do to ensure fair testing? 
To develop a good physique and thereby , an attractive posture . 
. How does the rain water reach from clouds to rivers or oceans? 
We can see glass or water as it reflects some part of the light . 
Can we convert one type of energy Different ways of using solar energy Do you know ? 
Write about any two animals in your list, describing the food types eaten by them and how they get their food? 
They occur only at high altitudes or high latitudes . 
Using the sharp point of the scissors' blade, or a large nail, punch a hole in the centre of the card (this is where the Sun will hang). 
Inoccupation is that condition when a person does not get employment in spite of having capability and wish to work . 
The area of the Indian Ocean is about 7 crore 36 lakh square kilometre . 
Milk is rich in . 
(b) , and were advocates of Virashaivism. 
There are temples in almost all the villages . 
The cycle mechanic used a compressor pump to inflate the cycle tube . 
Living bodies utilize the energy but release CO2 to the atmosphere . 
II . 
The man-made pollutants are considered to be more dangerous and hazardous than natural pollutants . 
= x ( atomic mass of Oxygen ) = x ( . u ) = u Eg : Molecular mass of Oxygen Molecule ( O ) Similarly Molecular mass of Carbon Dioxide CO Atomic mass of Carbon = , Atomic mass of oxygen = ( atomic mass of Carbon ) + ( atomic mass of Oxygen ) ( ) + ( ) = + = u Hence , molecular mass of Carbon dioxide is . 
Density of iron is more . 
Mosquitoes can locate human beings by odour and temperature of the body by using their sense of smell . 
The emergence of states is closely related to social change amongst tribal people. Two examples of this important part of our history are described below. 
A temperature of C to C during summer and C to C during winter is essential for maize . 
Carbon dioxide and methane released into the air during the decay of organic matter such as fallen leaves and food waste . 
Based on distance between Srikakulam and Tekkali on the map can you find out the Scale of the map? 
How did people at the station discriminate against Dr Ambedkar and his brothers? 
Answer the questions below. 
Asha and Latha are friends . 
So , an atom of one handed element will combine with another atom of one handed element . 
Charge a refill and make it touch the end of the paper clip. Observe what happens. 
It also attacks the respiratory muscles . 
What does this suggest about the particles of solid and liquid? 
LET US TRY AND FIND OUT 
minute km 
See an example . 
Some of the early food collecting tribes like ' Nishaada ' and ' Chaandala ' were grouped as untouchables . 
When ever required , they provide credit facility to the retailes . 
Separation of iron fillings from sand using magnet We found that no change had taken place in the chemical composition and no new product was formed . 
Betelvine ( vetrilai ) , pepper ( Milagu ) . 
One cubic centimetre is otherwise known as millilitre written as ml . 
This makes the bone of the baby strong . 
Loess plain was created over a vast area in northern China . 
(i) Mosses and Lichens are found in: 
Accordingly , the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics ( USSR ) was formed by including the republics of Georgia , Armenia , Ukraine and Azerbaijan . 
Bhaga 
The dog is guarding Joseph 's house . 
.. Corrosion 
Laws of reflection Angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection . 
CHAPTER CHEMICALS IN OUR DAILY LIFE Chemicals in our daily life Bleaching powder Sulphur dioxide Baking soda Soaps &amp; detergents Chlorine Preparation Preparation Uses Preparation Properties Uses Properties Uses Uses Properties and Uses of Chlorine - Preparation , We use a number of chemicals in our daily life . 
The neighbouring countries are connected through waterways while the distant countries by sea and air . 
The international space station that orbits Earth, seen from above. 
You can learn how to make an electromagnet at this URL : http://go.uen.org/bY The strength of this temporary magnet depends on the number of loops in the wire and the amount of current in the wire . 
(g) Silicon 
Now take a look at the roots, leaves and flowers of these plants. 
What have you seen ? 
An object is said to be in motion if it changes it s position. 
Sulphur 
. Consider the following two statements on power sharing and select the answer using the codes given below: 
Fig. A view of Machlipatnam, 
From human capital the owner gets private benefit but simultaneously society also acquires social benefits . 
We must drink enough water so that our body functions properly. 
What do you observe ? 
India: Distribution of cotton, woollen and silk industries 
Service is an activity in which one of the players from the serving team ( situated in zone ) tosses the ball into air and then hits it into the opponent 's court above the net . 
Material B ( C) 
The disease can be controlled by treatment , regular exercise , and regulated food habit . 
Heat is produced from this chemical energy . 
Abbakka won this battle . 
It is thus evident that the basic difference between living and nonliving is the presence or absence of life . 
The food that a plant produces is used by animals when they eat the plant and by other animals that eat them. 
Provide labels for the different stages. [ marks] 
The safety officer also explained us that it was always a risk to go down as accidents may occur. A tunnel may fall down or get flooded by water or there can be fire and suffocation due to poisonous gases. He explained that the mine administration has developed elaborate safety arrangements to prevent such accidents and that we should also take necessary precautions. He also explained how to face such accidents with the help of the safety kit. We put on the safety kit and got ready to go down. We reported at muster point for online registration. 
In the same way , can we measure the mass of your schoolbag using a balance ? 
In this way all the points from the dipped portion appears to have raised a little . 
. How do we Breathe? 
People being accustomed to high standard of living will have small families and thereby the pressure of population will decrease . 
. Vegetables 
This period ( - ) was also one of military dictatorship . 
Fig tree. 
Find the terms that denote different methods of separation hidden in this word puzzle : 
A computer is capable of counting very quickly . 
Twist one end of a plastic coated wire around the copper wire and push the copper wire into the lemon . 
Imagine that you sat in the above moving car beside the driver. Would you observe any change in the driver s position? Is there any change in the scene your s view through the window (buildings, trees etc.)? 
Britain declares war on Germany . 
Exercises 
1 ) Select the place for setting button through the button hole . 
Metropolis A large, densely populated city of a country or state, often the capital of the region 
The Nizam did not intervene and just watched the situation. In the independent Indian government took action and merged Hyderabad with India. The Telangana Armed Struggle continued even after the merger to enforce land reforms and protect the peasants from the doras. However, it was suppressed by the Indian armed forces and it gradually declined by . 
The WTO emerged out of the General Agreement on Trade and Tariff ( GATT ) . 
All the seven states are independent and sovereign and help each other for mutual development . 
and to cross rivers . 
It should be kept in mind that the fan is not for one person . 
( This shows that the base is completely neutralised by the acid . 
When you look at the timeline , notice how old the earth is and how remarkable all of the changes to its surface have been . 
Economic planning is of immense importance in ensuring speedy economic development by addressing those problems . 
Hold your ear with your fingers, press it and bend it as shown in the Fig. . Also touch and feel the tip of your nose. 
The part of earth lying north to the equator is known as the northern hemisphere , and that to the south as the southern hemisphere . 
ruler 
We will always keep in mind the names of our national days . 
And the substances which are not attracted by a magnet are called non - magnetic substances . 
Weather, Climate and Adaptations of Animals to Climate 
It is their individual choice . 
Different detritivores or decomposers derive their energy from waste and dead bodies of animals from different trophic levels . 
No effective antidote against AIDS has yet been discovered . 
So far this term you learnt about how the Sun and Earth interact to form day and night, and the seasons. In this section we are going to look further at how important the Sun is for us on Earth, and more specifically at how the energy from the Sun is essential for life on Earth. 
So we use an LED instead of an electric bulb . 